Low-Level Components of Analytic Activity in Information Visualization
Robert Amar, James Eagan, and John Stasko
College of Computing/GVU Center
Georgia Institute of Technology

ABSTRACT
Existing system-level taxonomies of visualization tasks are
geared more towards the design of particular representations than
the facilitation of user analytic activity. We present a set of ten
low-level analysis tasks that largely capture people’s activities
while employing information visualization tools for understanding
data. To help develop these tasks, we collected nearly 200 sample
questions from students about how they would analyze five
particular data sets from different domains. The questions, while
not being totally comprehensive, illustrated the sheer variety of
analytic questions typically posed by users when employing
information visualization systems. We hope that the presented set
of tasks is useful for information visualization system designers as
a kind of common substrate to discuss the relative analytic
capabilities of the systems. Further, the tasks may provide a form
of checklist for system designers.
CR Categories and Subject Descriptors: H.5.0 [Information
Interfaces and Presentation]:
General; J.0 [Computer
Applications]: General
Additional Keywords: Analytic activity, taxonomy, knowledge
discovery, design, evaluation.
1

INTRODUCTION

Information visualization research, especially that dealing with
the automatic generation of information presentations [10,15], has
produced several taxonomies of system tasks that map
visualization operations to user cognitive processes. In one sense,
these taxonomies might be considered low-level task taxonomies
or hierarchies, since they form part of a compositional language
upon which automatic generation systems build higher-order
externalizations of data.
However, considering these taxonomies as a basis upon which
to build models of analytic activity is made difficult by their
origins. While their elements can be algorithmically composed
into presentations, the composition process itself is ad-hoc,
relying on a designer's own insight and expressive capability
within a particular tool. These taxonomies reflect this systemoriented approach, rather than providing ways to think about all
the different analytic tasks a user may perform in a given space.
1.1
Representational Primacy and Task Focus
We have previously argued in [1] that these taxonomies typify
thought under a paradigm we call “representational primacy”, a
data-centric view of information visualization that relies on user
skill to generate insight. While effective representation is a
prerequisite to useful visualizations, we feel that “analytic
primacy”, which can be described as a focus on more closely
mapping visualization systems to user analytic goals, will increase
the value and utility of information visualization.
Email: bob, eaganj, stasko@cc.gatech.edu

IEEE Symposium on Information Visualization 2005
October 23-25, Minneapolis, MN, USA
0-7803-9464-X/05/$20.00 ©2005 IEEE.

With the aim of generating an actionable means for supporting
analytic activity, we wish to rethink some of the lower-level task
taxonomies that focus on a generated presentation as an end
result. In general, information visualization can benefit from
understanding the tasks that users accomplish while doing actual
analytic activity. Such understanding achieves two goals: first, it
aids designers in creating novel presentations that amplify users’
analytic abilities; second, it provides a common vocabulary for
evaluating the abilities and affordances of information
visualization systems with respect to user tasks.
We argue that a stronger focus on user tasks and analytic
activities in information visualization is necessary as current tools
do not seem to support analytic activity consistently. A 2004
study by Saraiya and North found that insights generated from
tools used to visualize gene expression data were not generally
valuable according to domain experts [11]. Systems such as INSPIRE [7] support analytic activities within the domain of
document search but may not generalize across domains. Current
tools may not even support representational activity very well;
consider, for example, the Kobsa study showing only 68-75%
accuracy on relatively simple tasks during commercial tool
evaluation [8].
1.2
The Nature of Analytic Activity
User analysis questions and tasks as part of analytic activity
typically range from broader, “high-level” goals to much more
specific, “low-level” inquiries. For example, a person studying
the history of motion picture films may have “high-level”,
uncertainty-tinged knowledge goals such as understanding trends
in popularity over time or determining how to predict which
movies will win Academy Awards. In the process of acquiring
this knowledge, the person may generate more specific, low-level
queries such as identifying the Academy Award-winning pictures
of the past ten years and determining whether or not movie length
correlates to the film’s popularity.
It is this latter set of questions, more specific and focused in
nature, on which we focus on in this article. In particular, we are
interested in generating a relatively small set of question types
that encompasses the set of user inquiries made while working
with information visualization systems. While it seems unlikely
that a small set of questions types would be complete and cover
all user queries, we hope that a small core set that addresses the
majority of user goals will emerge.
Efforts such as this invariably lead to some controversy. A
taxonomic decomposition of such a broad and diverse domain,
data analysis with information visualization, can never be perfect
or settled, and we expect some healthy discussion of whether we
have proposed the “right” set of tasks, whether other tasks need to
be added, and so on. Our goal is to stimulate such consideration,
however, as such discussion fosters an increased focus on analytic
activities that we believe will be ultimately beneficial.
2

RELATED WORK

Many researchers have studied the problem of best facilitating
the discovery of useful relationships within data sets. Approaches
have evolved over the years, starting with tools and guidelines

111

based largely on the properties of the data itself. Taxonomic
analyses of both system and user tasks have evolved as a way to
manage the wider variety of representations that has come into
standard use.
2.1
Data-Centric Approaches
Jacques Bertin, one of the earliest practitioners of data analysis
and presentation, understood the deduction of relationships to be a
matter of permutation [2]. Bertin proposed a synoptic that
differentiated between ordered, reorderable (what we might today
call “nominal”), and topographic data, established retinal qualities
of marks that would allow viewers to differentiate between marks,
and provided guidelines for representing data as arrays of marks,
histograms, and curves based on its dimensionality. One can
understand lower-level analytic activity as the organization of
information gained from the differentiation between and the
permutation of graphical marks, although such a framing does not
always provide an understanding of how this activity is organized.
John Tukey developed several methods known collectively as
exploratory data analysis [13]. Tukey was interested in using
statistics to extract potentially useful hypotheses from data, as
opposed to confirming existing proposed hypotheses. To
accomplish these goals, he introduced quantitative methods to
reduce the effect of outliers, such as resistant lines and median
polish analysis, and visual techniques such as box plots,
rootograms, and Pareto charts that emphasize summary statistics
and enumerate potential root causes of phenomena.
2.2
Task-based and System-based Taxonomic Approaches
Wehrend and Lewis [14] propose a classic taxonomy of what
could be called “cognitive tasks”. They create a matrix of
representation sub-problems that correspond to a particular
combination of an object type, such as scalar or vector, and a user
cognitive task, such as correlation, distribution, or point
identification; the authors identify eleven such user tasks based on
a literature search (identify, locate, distinguish, categorize, cluster,
distribute, rank, compare within entities, compare between
relations, associate, correlate). They then populate the matrix
with representation techniques to create a mapping between
techniques and problems. Finally, they show how techniques
from this matrix can be used to generate visualizations of flow in
irrigation systems.
Efforts in automatic presentation generation have produced a
different perspective on low-level visualization system tasks.
The Roth and Mattis [10] taxonomy informs presentation
design within the SAGE tool. While much of the taxonomy
presented deals with static characteristics of the data, one of its
dimensions deals explicitly with user information-seeking goals.
Roth and Mattis use two characteristics to deal with such goals:
display functions, which vary presentation of a data set based on
whether users desire exact value lookup, comparison, or
correlation; and distribution functions, which specify how to
distribute sets of related information within the presentation.
Zhou and Feiner [15] examine techniques for automatically
creating multimedia presentations in their tool, IMPROVISE,
based on user goals. The authors group high-level presentation
goals into two intents: “inform”, which deals with elaboration and
summarization of data; and “enable”, which deals with data
exploration and derivation of relationships. They then refine the
Wehrend and Lewis operations into visual tasks organized by
their visual accomplishments (low-level user or presenter goals)
and visual implications (what visual capabilities are called upon in
the attainment of the visual accomplishments). Each presentation
intent maps to visual tasks that achieve it; for instance, the intent
“enable-compute-sum” has correlate, locate, and rank.

112

Finally, other taxonomies take a more system capability-driven
approach to characterizing visualization operations.
Shneiderman [12] posits a task-by-data-type taxonomy that
crosses information-seeking visualization tasks (overview, zoom,
filter, details-on-demand, relate, history, extract) with different
types of data (1-D, 2-D, 3-D, multi-dimensional, time series,
network, tree) and discusses both examples and missed
opportunities for supporting the given tasks. The taxonomy
assumes an implicit mapping between user goals and these
visualization tasks.
Card presents a Visualization Reference Model [3] that
emphasizes, among other things, the specific mappings of data
tables into visual structures, and the iterative effects of human
interactions with these mappings. Card uses the constraints
presented by these mappings to organize information visualization
techniques into three types of “visual structure” (simple,
composed, and interactive) as well as focus + context abstractions.
Card did not explicitly map user tasks to transformations within
the reference model; more recently, though, Card, Pirolli and
colleagues have done work in understanding analyst sensemaking
techniques using cognitive task analysis techniques [4]. This work
posits interlocked, bidirectional information foraging and
sensemaking loops, and describes high-level tasks done in going
both from theory to data as well as data to theory.
Chi [6] taxonomizes existing visualization techniques into
several data categories (scientific visualization, geographic
InfoVis, 2D, multi-dimensional, information landscapes, trees,
networks, text, and web). He extends the Card reference model
into a Data State Reference Model [5] in order to isolate common
operational steps within each visualization type. Chi has the
explicit aims of assisting implementers with choosing and
deploying visualization techniques and broadening the
visualization design space.
3

TOWARD CONCRETE TASKS FOR ANALYTIC ACTIVITY

Our original intent was to create low-level analytic tasks from
experience and literature search. However, accomplishing the goal
of depicting low-level concrete steps in analytic activity and
providing operational guidance to designers requires a more
grounded approach. We decided to draw upon a basis of existing
document analytic activity to serve as a foundation.
3.1
Data Collection
To gather a corpus of analysis questions, we reviewed the work
of students in our Spring 2004 Information Visualization course.
As part of a series of assignments, students were asked to generate
data analysis questions for provided data sets and then evaluate
how well the questions could be answered using particular
commercial visualization tools (in this case, Spotfire Pro 4.0,
Eureka/Table Lens, InfoZoom and SeeIT). The students generated
196 valid analysis tasks that we used in the next phase.
The following table lists the data sets used, along with their
dimensionality, cardinality, and the number of analysis questions
students generated for each data set.
Data Set

Dimensionality

Cardinality

Cereals
Mutual funds
Cars
Films
Grocery surveys

15
14
10
10
8

78
987
407
1742
5164

Questions
Generated
43
14
53
47
39

The directions to the students for generating questions read:

“Pick the two [data sets] that are most interesting to
you to use in the assignment. Briefly scan the text of
the files and familiarize yourself with the variables.
Write down a few hypotheses to be considered, tasks
to be performed, or questions to be asked about the
data elements. Recall all the different kinds of analysis
tasks that we discussed earlier in the course
(identification, outliers, correlations, clusters, trends,
associations, presentation, etc.).”
3.2
Analysis Approach
We used an affinity diagramming approach, grouping similar
questions and iteratively refining the groups according to what we
believed to be the core knowledge goal of the questions in each
group. Clearly, a general concept such as “correlation” can
involve subtasks or sub-operations; however, most of the suboperations performed in the questions generally fell under tasks
we already had isolated from other questions.
Our affinity diagramming approach led to ten component tasks
across the analytic questions submitted by the students. Since we
concentrated on user goals independent of particular visualization
systems or paradigms (although the questions may have been
influenced by the systems used in the assignment, as discussed
later in this article), our list of tasks is free of system-specific
operations such as “zoom”. Tasks such as “filter” are offered in
the spirit of users’ analytic desires as opposed to that of low-level
cognitive tasks or operators.
4

AN ANALYTIC TASK TAXONOMY
The ten tasks from the affinity diagramming analysis are:
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

Retrieve Value
Filter
Compute Derived Value
Find Extremum
Sort
Determine Range
Characterize Distribution
Find Anomalies
Cluster
Correlate

Each of the tasks is presented in the following sections, along
with a pro forma abstract [9] and example questions that serve as
general models and examples of the tasks. These tasks are not
meant to be a normative picture of user analytic activity, but
rather to provide a vocabulary for discussion.
In the task descriptions, we use the following terms:
•
data case: an entity in the data set
•
attribute: a value measured for all data cases in a data set
•
aggregation function: a function that creates a numeric
representation for a set of data cases (e.g. average, sum,
count)
1. Retrieve Value
General Description: Given a set of specific cases, find attributes
of those cases.
Pro Forma Abstract: What are the values of attributes {X, Y, Z,
...} in the data cases {A, B, C, ...}?
Examples:
- What is the mileage per gallon of the Audi TT?
- How long is the movie Gone with the Wind?

This task serves as a subtask for many other tasks; in particular,
once a set of cases is known from another operation, such as
finding a case with an extreme value of an attribute (see task 4,
“Find Extremum”), this task is often used to read off relevant
attributes. However, we only classify a question as a value
retrieval if the particular cases to be examined are specified at the
time of the question.
2. Filter
General Description: Given some concrete conditions on
attribute values, find data cases satisfying those conditions.
Pro Forma Abstract: Which data cases satisfy conditions {A, B,
C...}?
Examples:
- What Kellogg's cereals have high fiber?
- What comedies have won awards?
- Which funds underperformed the SP-500?
This is another task used as a subtask in many other questions.
In particular, this type of question relies on classifying cases by a
condition that can be measured independent of any other data case
in the data set.
This leads to an interesting phenomenon for questions such as,
“Which data cases have a high value for attribute X?” In this
case, an operating definition for what entails a “high” value is
necessary; once such a definition is established, the question
becomes answerable in a concrete fashion. On the other hand,
questions such as, “Which data case has the highest value of
attribute X?” rely on properties of all other elements in the data
set, and are thus not part of this category.
For example, in the question “What Kellogg’s cereals have high
fiber,” there is an implicit definition of what it means for a cereal
to be high in fiber, independent of the fiber values of the other
cereals in the data set. Once the analyst makes that implicit
definition explicit, this question becomes “What Kellogg’s cereals
have more than x grams of fiber” for some value of x. Questions
of the form “What Kellogg’s cereal has the highest fiber,” by
contrast, are only answerable relative to the other cereals in the
data set.
3. Compute Derived Value
General Description: Given a set of data cases, compute an
aggregate numeric representation of those data cases.
Pro Forma Abstract: What is the value of aggregation function F
over a given set S of data cases?
Examples:
- What is the average calorie content of Post cereals?
- What is the gross income of all stores combined?
- How many manufacturers of cars are there?
Computing an aggregation (e.g. average, median, count) is a
common task in data analysis. In particular, more complex
aggregators such as “count-unique-values-of” can provide insights
into the data itself. This task also appears as a subtask in other
operations; in particular, some questions compare categories
without a particular operating definition of what is being
compared, such as: “Which cars are more fuel-efficient, Japanese
cars or American cars?” These questions imply some sort of
aggregator function without specifying exactly how that
aggregation is calculated.

113

4. Find Extremum
General Description: Find data cases possessing an extreme
value of an attribute over its range within the data set.
Pro Forma Abstract: What are the top/bottom N data cases with
respect to attribute A?
Examples:
- What is the car with the highest MPG?
- What director/film has won the most awards?
- What Robin Williams film has the most recent release date?
Finding high or low values of an attribute was a very common
operation across the student questions. Note that this task differs
from “Sort” (task 5) since a complete sort is not always necessary
to find an extreme value, and also differs from “Find Anomalies”
(task 8) since anomalies are not always extreme values.

Examples:
- What is the distribution of carbohydrates in cereals?
- What is the age distribution of shoppers?
Distribution, like range, is another important task for
characterizing data. Users can get a general sense of distribution
to understand “normalcy” in data as opposed to anomaly (see task
8, “Find Anomalies”). Sometimes the distribution task is hidden;
for example, “Compare Frosted Flakes’ calories per serving to
those of all other cereals” is really a question of location within a
distribution.
8. Find Anomalies
General Description: Identify any anomalies within a given set
of data cases with respect to a given relationship or expectation,
e.g. statistical outliers.
Pro Forma Abstract: Which data cases in a set S of data cases
have unexpected/exceptional values?

5. Sort
General Description: Given a set of data cases, rank them
according to some ordinal metric.
Pro Forma Abstract: What is the sorted order of a set S of data
cases according to their value of attribute A?
Examples:
- Order the cars by weight.
- Rank the cereals by calories.

Examples:
- Are there exceptions to the relationship between horsepower and
acceleration?
- Are there any outliers in protein?
Anomalous values in a data set often provide a basis for further
exploration. This task can be thought of as a complementary task
to “distribution”, although it is not always framed as such (e.g.
sometimes a distribution is assumed, as in the case of a standard
box-and-whisker plot).

Although this task is fairly self-explanatory, it appeared only
infrequently as a task unto itself. Sorting is generally a substrate
for extreme value finding, especially when searching for a number
of values at the extreme and not just the most extreme value.

9. Cluster

6. Determine Range

Pro Forma Abstract: Which data cases in a set S of data cases
are similar in value for attributes {X, Y, Z, …}?

General Description: Given a set of data cases and an attribute of
interest, find the span of values within the set.
Pro Forma Abstract: What is the range of values of attribute A
in a set S of data cases?
Examples:
- What is the range of film lengths?
- What is the range of car horsepowers?
- What actresses are in the data set?
The range task is an important task for understanding the
dynamics of data within a data set. Users can use range data to
help decide the suitability of the data set for a particular analysis,
or understand something about the general types of values found
for a particular attribute. The “range” of a categorical attribute can
be thought of as an enumeration of all its unique values in a set.
7. Characterize Distribution
General Description: Given a set of data cases and a quantitative
attribute of interest, characterize the distribution of that attribute’s
values over the set.
Pro Forma Abstract: What is the distribution of values of
attribute A in a set S of data cases?

114

General Description: Given a set of data cases, find clusters of
similar attribute values.

Examples:
- Are there groups of cereals w/ similar fat/calories/sugar?
- Is there a cluster of typical film lengths?
Users naturally group similar items together. This proximity
can have a number of connotations depending on the clustering
attributes; for example, similar products may be market
competitors, members of a family of products, or simply represent
the “normal” or expected case as opposed to outliers.
10. Correlate
General Description: Given a set of data cases and two
attributes, determine useful relationships between the values of
those attributes.
Pro Forma Abstract: What is the correlation between attributes
X and Y over a given set S of data cases?
Examples:
- Is there a correlation between carbohydrates and fat?
- Is there a correlation between country of origin and MPG?
- Do different genders have a preferred payment method?
- Is there a trend of increasing film length over the years?

One of the most interesting observations about the corpus of
student questions as a whole was how frequently students desired
to “correlate” one or more non-numeric attributes. The semantics
of such questions, in our interpretation, leaned more towards
isolating “coincidences” of interest. Membership in a category
may be predictive of certain attribute values, but does not predict
those same attribute values in a different category; for example, a
comparison of American, German, and Japanese cars’ gas mileage
does not allow you to predict the gas mileage of Korean cars. The
semantics of “true” quantitative correlation questions deal with
purely numeric variables and the ability to generate a
mathematical predictive model relating the values of attributes
within a data set.
Questions such as the fourth example question above involving
trends over time were quite common in the corpus of questions.
We interpret such questions simply as correlations with temporal
variables.

evaluated for being less than, greater than, or equal to another
value or values.
This leads to the notion of questions whose overall goal is too
“low-level” for our analytic task taxonomy. For instance, the
following questions involve the aforementioned mathematical
comparison operation:

5

5.2.2
Higher-level Questions
We have found that the proposed ten tasks cover the vast
majority of the corpus of analytic questions we studied. Some
questions, however, imply tasks not explicitly covered by our task
set, but instead they can be thought of as guiding higher-level
exploration in the data set. For example:

DISCUSSION

It is difficult to construct a taxonomy that perfectly
characterizes a domain so open to interpretation. In this section
we discuss internal and external issues with the taxonomy and
analysis methods.
5.1
Compound Tasks
Considering the set of tasks in the taxonomy to be analytic
“primitives” allows us to examine some questions that do not
cleanly fit into one category but rather appear to be compositions
of primitive tasks. For instance, the task “Sort the cereal
manufacturers by average fat content” involves a Compute
Derived Value (average fat) primitive followed by a Sort
primitive.
Further, users may simply be interested in particular attribute
values from a set smaller than the entire data set; for example, on
the movies data set, one might ask, “Which actors have co-starred
with Julia Roberts?” One can complete this task by first finding
all movies with Julia Roberts (Filter) and then enumerating the set
of actors within those movies (Retrieve Value).
As another example, consider the question, “Who starred in the
most films in 1978?” This task differs from the basic extremum
task in that the domain of the extremum operation is no longer
data cases, but aggregate relationships of those data cases; in
specific, a user must enumerate each actor and actress in the
relevant portion of the data set (Retrieve Value), assign each one a
count of the number of data cases in which each actor/actress was
present (Compute Derived Value), and finally determine which
actor/actress has the highest count (Find Extremum).
5.2
Omissions from the Taxonomy
Even outside the context of combining analytic “primitives”,
there were a number of questions that still did not fit cleanly into
the taxonomy. Such questions are marked either by a
fundamentally mathematical or computational nature rather than
an analytic one, or by uncertainty, either in the analytic process
necessary to answer the question or user criteria employed during
the knowledge-making process.
5.2.1
Low-level Mathematical and Cognitive Actions
In constructing the taxonomy, we abstracted away as low-level,
and thus beyond the scope of the present work, some basic
mathematical and cognitive operations, such as determining that a
data case mathematically satisfies filtering criteria or conditions
and computing aggregate values from a mathematical perspective.
In particular, we explicitly acknowledge the existence of a lowlevel mathematical comparison operation, one in which a value is

•
•

“Which cereal has more sugar, Cheerios or Special K?”
“Compare the average MPG of American and Japanese
cars.”

These questions utilize Retrieve Value and Compute Derived
Value primitives, respectively, followed by a mathematical
comparison operation. We view this very low-level comparison
as being a fundamental cognitive action taken by the person using
a visualization tool, rather than as a primitive in our analytic task
taxonomy.

•
•
•

“Do any variables correlate with fat?”
“How do mutual funds get rated?”
“Are there car aspects that Toyota has concentrated on?”

Much learning of a domain can occur in the use of a properly
structured visualization, and discovering interesting relationships
between domain parameters is one part of that learning. While the
corpus of questions mainly limited such exploration to correlation
(another factor to be discussed in the next section), a lessstructured exploration is definitely possible.
5.2.3
Uncertain Criteria
Other questions in the corpus contained uncertain criteria, for
example:
•
•
•

“Do cereals (X, Y, Z…) sound tasty?”
“What are the characteristics of the most valued
customers?”
“Are there any particular funds that are better than
others?”

While these questions may be answered by supposing the
existence of some black-box aggregation function, there may be
other ways to answer the question, such as use of a distribution or
clustering method. Fundamentally, each of these questions
involves a value judgment that is beyond the proposed primitives.
Another style of question common in the set involves a
comparison operation that is much higher in level and more
abstract than the fundamental mathematical comparison operation
discussed earlier in the section. For instance, consider the
questions:
•
•
•

“What other cereals are most similar to Trix?”
“How does the Toyota RAV4 compare to the Honda
CRV?”
“Compare the distributions of values for sugar and fat in
the cereals.”

Each of these questions involves a more subjective evaluation
of a data case, attribute, or derived value in comparison to others.
We felt that the fundamental operation being performed in each of

115

these examples was not at the level of the ten primitives in our
taxonomy.
6

OVERALL CONCERNS

6.1
Similarity to Existing Taxonomies
Of the taxonomies presented earlier, the closest in spirit to our
efforts is that of Wehrend and Lewis [14]. While both taxonomies
share many of the same tasks, several tasks differ either partially
or entirely. We consider those tasks here.
We present four new analytic tasks not present in the Wehrend
and Lewis framework: Compute Derived Value; Find Extremum;
Find Anomalies; and Determine Range. The Wehrend and Lewis
framework, similarly, presents operations not found in our
taxonomy: associate; categorize; compare; and distinguish.
The four new tasks in our taxonomy frequently occurred in the
corpus of analytic questions. The Compute Derived Value task
frequently arose in performing visual analytic operations on
attributes not directly present in the data set. Often, this task was
implied as if the derived value were already a part of the data set.
The Determine Range, Find Extremum and Find Anomalies tasks
also occurred frequently enough in our corpus to warrant their
own singleton tasks.
Wehrend and Lewis’ associate, categorize, and distinguish tasks
do not appear in our taxonomy. Questions relating to these tasks
appeared rarely in our corpus. In each case, we decomposed that
question into a combination of our primitive tasks. For example,
distinguishing two cars involves Retrieve Value operations and
the Comparison meta-operation.
Wehrend and Lewis include two compare operations, compare
within relations and compare between relations. As discussed
earlier, we view Compare as a higher-level meta-operation.
Finally, the Retrieve Value and Filter tasks relate to the identify
and locate tasks of the Wehrend and Lewis taxonomy. Each
involves acquisition of data cases and/or attribute values.
The composition of the tasks in our taxonomy may seem
relatively unsurprising. While our approach comes from a
different perspective, the tasks share much similarity with those
from other taxonomies, as illustrated above. Furthermore, our
tasks resemble operations that one would find in specialized tools
such as Microsoft Excel or database languages such as SQL.
While many of the data manipulation operations that one would
perform are similar, we focus on analytic operations as they
would apply to an information visualization system. Where
languages such as SQL focus on data management, we focus on
analysis.
6.2
Relationships to Higher-Level Tasks
A common theme in all of the taxonomies described in the
Related Work section is that user goals are usually thought of as
static and explicitly treated only as far as they map into low-level
visual tasks. While such tasks are essential, they do not provide a
firm basis for supporting the kinds of knowledge-making
activities that people seek to perform every day. In [1], we
provided examples of such activity:
•
•
•
•

Complex decision-making under uncertainty
Learning a domain
Identification of trends
Predicting the future

We further classified the gap between representation and
analysis into two so-called “analytic gaps”: the Worldview Gap,
which concerns whether or not the right data and relationships are
being shown; and the Rationale Gap, which asks whether the

116

relationships inferred from a visualization can be trusted under
uncertainty and used effectively to rationalize conclusions drawn
from use of a visualization. We then posited six knowledge
precepts for use in designing visualizations that bridge these gaps,
as well as evaluated their use in existing systems. However, we
have not examined how these knowledge precepts might map to
lower-level concrete tasks for visualization systems.
Our analytic task taxonomy can help provide a basis for such a
mapping. Consider again the task of learning a domain, as
discussed briefly in Section 5.2.2. Our corpus of analytic
questions clearly implies some meta-information tasks such as
browsing for relationships (for example, through repeated
Correlate and Characterize Distribution operations) and
discovering the breadth of coverage in a data set (e.g. performing
Find Extremum in tandem with Computed Derived Values, such
as counts of unique values of a categorical attribute, and applying
Determine Range of quantitative variables). In discovering a
preponderance of underspecified criteria such as “high” or “low”
in the questions asked, we assert that these criteria may be posed
in the spirit of interactive discovery rather than operationallydefined pruning.
Methodological Concerns
6.3
The use of student questions as a basis for thought and
evaluation obviously has limitations and caveats. Students were
presented with the tools before coming up with questions, and
may have fit their questions to match material presented in class
as well as the tools themselves, as they had to answer those same
questions using the tools as well as compare the tools’ usability.
For example, a preponderance of correlation-type questions
existed even though the directions stated not to make all questions
about correlation. We speculate that this might be due to the
availability of scatterplots in Spotfire; similarly, ranking and
sorting questions are well suited to Table Lens, and aggregations
are a major analytical component of SeeIT.
Repeating our analysis and process, but instead using
professional analysts such as drug discovery researchers or
intelligence analysts to generate questions, may provide some new
low-level tasks. It would be interesting to compare the task
clusters emerging from the work of such domain experts to those
found with the students. The tasks we identified tended toward
deduction, while the efforts of domain experts often involve more
exploratory analysis such as hypothesis formation and
confirmation.
7

CONCLUSION

We present a set of ten primitive analysis task types,
representative of the kinds of specific questions that a person may
ask when working with a data set. The development of this set of
primitives stemmed from ongoing research into the utility of
information visualization systems. It also was driven by a large
set of questions gathered from an assignment in which students
generated queries about five sample data sets. We used an affinity
diagramming approach to cluster the individual questions into sets
of related items. Our set of analysis task types is similar to those
generated earlier by other researchers, but a number of new
primitives and ideas did emerge. Our focus here was more
directly on the analysis primitives that one might expect people to
be generating as they use an information visualization system to
achieve some higher-level knowledge goals.
We believe that these primitives can serve as a form of common
language or vocabulary when discussing the capabilities,
advantages, and weaknesses of different information visualization
systems. Researchers and system developers will be able to
describe a system's support for performing these operations by
identifying its particular representation, interaction, and interface

support for the operation. For example, how does the visualization
presented by a system support characterizing distributions or
finding anomalies? Does a system adequately facilitate the
computation of derived values?
Furthermore, by identifying and enumerating these primitive
analysis task types, we hope to foster a continued emphasis on the
importance of analytic measures of information visualization
systems. It is vital that information visualization system designers
both develop innovative, new visualization techniques and clearly
articulate the analytic qualities of those techniques. These
primitive analysis task types also can serve as an informal checklist along which to assess and evaluate new systems and
techniques.
REFERENCES
[1]

[2]
[3]

[4]

[5]
[6]
[7]
[8]
[9]

[10]
[11]

[12]

[13]
[14]

[15]

Robert A. Amar and John T. Stasko, “Knowledge Precepts for
Design and Evaluation of Information Visualizations”, IEEE
Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics, 11(4): 432442, July/August 2005.
Jacques Bertin. Graphics and Graphic Information Processing.
Walter de Gruyter, New York, 1981.
Stuart Card. "Information visualization." In Human-Computer
Interaction Handbook: Fundamentals, Evolving Technologies and
Emerging Applications. pp. 544 - 582, Lawrence Erlbaum
Associates, Inc., Mahwah, NJ, 2002.
Stuart Card and Peter Pirolli. “The Sensemaking Process and
Leverage Points for Analyst Technology as Identified through
Cognitive Task Analysis”, Proc. International Conference on
Intelligence Analysis 2005.
Ed H. Chi and John T. Riedl, “An Operator Interaction Framework
for Visualization Systems”, Proc. InfoVis ’98, pp. 63-70.
Ed H. Chi, “A Taxonomy of Visualization Techniques using the
Data State Reference Model”, Proc. InfoVis ’00, pp. 69-75.
IN-SPIRE, http://www.in-spire.pnl.gov/, 2004.
Alfred Kobsa, “An Empirical Comparison of Three Commercial
Information Visualization Systems”, Proc. InfoVis’01, pp. 123-130.
William M. Newman, “A Preliminary Analysis of the Products of
HCI Research, Based on Pro Forma Abstracts”, Proc. CHI ’94, pp.
278-284.
Steven F. Roth and Joe Mattis, “Data characterization for intelligent
graphics presentation,” Proc. CHI ‘90, pp. 193-200.
Purvi Saraiya, Chris North and Karen Duca, “An Evaluation of
Microarray Visualization Tools for Biological Insight”, Proc
InfoVis’04, pp. 1-8.
Ben Shneiderman, “The Eyes Have It: A Task by Data Type
Taxonomy for Information Visualizations”, Proc. IEEE Symposium
on Visual Languages ’96, p. 336.
John Tukey. Exploratory Data Analysis. Addison-Wesley, Reading,
MA, 1977.
Stephen Wehrend and Clayton Lewis, “A Problem-Oriented
Classification of Visualization Techniques”, Proc. Vis ’90, pp. 139143.
Michelle X. Zhou and Stephen K. Feiner, “Visual task
characterization for automated visual discourse synthesis”, Proc.
CHI 1998, pp. 392-399.

117

