Yale University Department of Music

Discussion by Gordon Binkerd
Author(s): Gordon Binkerd
Source: Journal of Music Theory, Vol. 4, No. 1 (Apr., 1960), pp. 77-79
Published by: Duke University Press on behalf of the Yale University Department of Music
Stable URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/843050
Accessed: 14/12/2009 17:42
Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of JSTOR's Terms and Conditions of Use, available at
http://www.jstor.org/page/info/about/policies/terms.jsp. JSTOR's Terms and Conditions of Use provides, in part, that unless
you have obtained prior permission, you may not download an entire issue of a journal or multiple copies of articles, and you
may use content in the JSTOR archive only for your personal, non-commercial use.
Please contact the publisher regarding any further use of this work. Publisher contact information may be obtained at
http://www.jstor.org/action/showPublisher?publisherCode=duke.
Each copy of any part of a JSTOR transmission must contain the same copyright notice that appears on the screen or printed
page of such transmission.
JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide range of
content in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and facilitate new forms
of scholarship. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.

Duke University Press and Yale University Department of Music are collaborating with JSTOR to digitize,
preserve and extend access to Journal of Music Theory.

http://www.jstor.org

THE PROFESSIONAL MUSIC THEORIST
analyst and the creative theorist, all of whom have equal dignity and
value. The author seems somewhat reluctant to accept the equality of
these related functions of his ideal professional
theorist, due probably
to his own experiences
with one or more of these types.
Criticisms of
the clrrent curricula and "theory pedagogues" are all too well founded
- but the deplorable conditions described are by no means universal,
and efforts are being made to remedy present conditions.
Professor Kraehenbuehl's paper is an honest and able effort to
clarify the training and the functions of the theorist, though, perhaps
wisely, little is said about his "habits'. Since agreement is lacking
among eminent musicians and educators regarding these matters, we
are indebted to the author for his conscientious effort to summarize the
problem and suggest suitable solutions.
Discussion

by Gordon Binkerd

I find myself basically
in agreement
with nearly all of Mr.
Kraehenbuehl's paper.
The picture he projects of an intelligently
trained and oriented theorist is refreshing and encouraging.
This suggested theorist appears to be in reality a musical historian, i. e. a scholar concerned in the main with systematic knowledge
and understanding of the past. Such an historian would interpret the
past as beginning with today and extending backwards through time.
Concern with the music of our own times as well as that of more remote periods adds a significant dimension to what would otherwise be
in the history of music.
This kind of musical
simply a specialist
scholar would fall directly in the line of theorists reaching from the
Middle Ages to Mr. Kraehenbuehl's own teacher, Paul Hindemith.
Basic musicianship,
that is, training in singing and hearing, is
certainly not theory, and I agree that there is no more reason for a
theorist to preempt this field of instruction than for any other musician.
I agree with his definition of the term "music theory:' I agree with his
statements as to what functions a music theorist should concern himself with and in which he should demonstrate competence.
I agree that
the present theorists more often than not exist in a kind of musical noman's land with their feet on no discernible soil of their own. They are
often regarded by their colleagues with suspicion and "bitter amuseI agree that the theorist's training
ment' as Mr. Kraehenbuehl says.
should be on a par with that of any other specialist.
I agree that he
shbuld be a demonstrably gifted musician, either as a composer or as
a performer, or both. I agree that he should be trained in scientific
I agree that the theorist should be charged with providing
method.
whether the music be old or recent.
understanding to the performer,
Both the present-day
composer and performer are at a great disadvantage in their lack of any kind of intelligent codification of operating
Scholars who develop a theory of composing procedure
principles.
related to our own times would perhaps do as much for the significant
progress of the art as any composer or group of composers.
I agree
that the music faculty, no matter how small, should include one of
these envisioned theorists.
I also would agree that a real stumbling
block to progress in this direction lies in the present body of theory
77

GORDON BINKERD
teachers.
I do have some disagreement,
I wonder if it is true,
however.
as Mr. Kraehenbuehl says, that "music theory may have little or
The bulk of the Euronothing to do" with harmony and counterpoint.
pean musical heritage is either harmonic in nature, contrapuntal, or
some combination of.both.
concern with
possesses
Any theoretical
that music, then, would be intimately bound up with the harmonic and
contrapuntal aspects of it. If this be so, then the "study" of harmony
or counterpoint would seem a natural occupation.
I am not so prepared as Mr. Kraehenbuehl to throw out the actual
writing of fugue or the admittedly artificial
practice with species
counterpoint. I do not agree that species counterpoint is unsatisfactory
as a basis for understanding renaissance
Theorists of
counterpoint.
the 15th and 16th centuries speak continuously of the treatment of dissonance in accordance
with the temporal value of the note and its
rhythmic placement, and this seems to me to be a satisfactory definition of species counterpoint.
In fact, of all theoretical procedures in
use today, that kind of treatment to be found in Jeppesen's books on the
music of Palestrina
seems the most nearly related to what Mr.
Kraehenbuehl proposes as valid theory.
To answer Mr. Kraehenbuehl's question as to why anyone today
should learn to write a fugue, I must speak only with respect to my
own training as a composer.
The study of Bach fugues and the Gedalge
fugue book with Walter Piston proved the most important single factor
in my preparation as a composer.
When one attempts the writing of
one is slightly surany of the contrapuntal styles of the Renaissance,
prised on finding how easy it is. Leaving aside the matter of accurateof the various composers,
one soon
ly reproducing the individualities
finds that the relating of voices to each other intervalically makes for
realtive ease of handling.
a fair example of "modern"
Similarly,
counterpoint can be rather easily written, since here also so much emWhen one is forced, howphasis is placed on intervalic relationships.
ever, to produce a like contrapuntal freedom within a relatively
restricted and demanding harmonic framework, as in the 18th-century
It is an exercise which makes
fugue, one finds significant difficulties.
more telling demands upon the composer than any other technical form
and puts the composer very much on his mettle. But this is not only an
academic exercise.
In my opinion, the unrestricted contrapuntal freedom of much of today's music must eventually come to grips with an
organized harmonic framework, and when that happens the composer
may be writing under very nearly the same circumstances
as when he
is trying to produce a "Bach fugue' I do not know of anything else which
so develops the composer's ability to produce meaningful lines against
a clear and intelligible harmonic foil. It is true that fugue lends itself
to teaching, but it resists strongly to writing.
In my opinion there are three broadtypes of combining parts, and
they are all important today. The first is the kind of polyphony written
where the binding factors are interval and
during the Renaissance,
mode. The second is that of 18th-century counterpoint built upon an
The third is that found in the 19th century where
imperative harmony.
harmonic organization is predominant, and where counterpoint is to a
The writing of the present and of the future is not
degree vestigial.
78

THE PROFESSIONAL MUSIC THEORIST
likely, in my opinion, to uncover a further comparable method of combination.
I think a distinction
snould be made between the musician,
at
least insofar as he is a composer,
and the natural scientist.
The
scientist
is concerned primarily
with current matters.
As Mr.
Kraehenbuehl says, "the past is summed up for him in a few general
of carefully
principles which he can observe in action in a series
selected laboratory experiments!'
The difference seems to me to be
that which separates a science from an art. The scientist is inclined
to dispose rather quickly of past achievements
and to dwell upon the
present and future. A work of art, once produced, takes on a kind of
timeless
quality and may be as significant now as it was five hundred
is much
years ago. Also, the musician, as distinct from the scientist,
more concerned with developing skills, and difficult skills they are.
The composer learns by his own experience,
but also by absorbing the
experience of the past. In this connection, it is somewhat disturbing to
me to hear Mr. Kraehenbuehl say that tradition for the composer is
"the activity of the immediately preceding generation,
perhaps even
little more than the music of the past few years!' And again, "the music of his own century, the only music that will be of any great significance to him within 20 or 30 years.'
It will be noted that most of my objections concern the training of
the composer.
I should like to make the point, however, that often the
composer is a musician who has been trained as a performer or as a
For this
historian, and who only eventually emerges as a composer.
reason, if for no other, I believe we must keep in our curricula those
aspects of our art which attempt to keep alive the basic skills of the
past.
Discussion

by Robert Melcher

Most theory teachers agree that standards,
and
procedures,
course contents in their profession have too long been static, and in
some areas even nonexistent.
For theory study on the graduate level,
Mr. Kraehenbuehl has provided some stimulating and provocative ideas,
and it is sincerely to be hoped that many of his goals will be realized
in considerably less time than the thirty to fifty years he prophesies.
But when his suggestions are applied to the undergraduate level, serious doubts arise in my mind, for it seems to me that he fails to distinguish between the needs of graduate and undergraduate students and
the kind of teaching required in each of these fields.
I shall therefore
restrict my comments to the effects of Mr. Kraehenbuehl's
recommendations as they bear upon the teaching of music theory at the undergraduate level.
Mr. Kraehenbuehl says that the course of graduate study he proposes would develop the student into "an excellent theory pedagogue:'
But would it? The possession of a vast store of knowledge is not enough
in itself to make one a successful
teacher on the undergraduate level.
The teacher of undergraduate students must, indeed, be a scholar, but
he must also be able to present his knowledge to immature minds in a
clear and stimulating fashion. Although graduate schools have produced
79

