Yale University Department of Music

Report: The 1994 Lancaster University Music Analysis Conference
Author(s): Richmond Browne
Source: Journal of Music Theory, Vol. 39, No. 2 (Autumn, 1995), pp. 385-395
Published by: Duke University Press on behalf of the Yale University Department of Music
Stable URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/843973
Accessed: 16/12/2009 08:56
Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of JSTOR's Terms and Conditions of Use, available at
http://www.jstor.org/page/info/about/policies/terms.jsp. JSTOR's Terms and Conditions of Use provides, in part, that unless
you have obtained prior permission, you may not download an entire issue of a journal or multiple copies of articles, and you
may use content in the JSTOR archive only for your personal, non-commercial use.
Please contact the publisher regarding any further use of this work. Publisher contact information may be obtained at
http://www.jstor.org/action/showPublisher?publisherCode=duke.
Each copy of any part of a JSTOR transmission must contain the same copyright notice that appears on the screen or printed
page of such transmission.
JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide range of
content in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and facilitate new forms
of scholarship. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.

Duke University Press and Yale University Department of Music are collaborating with JSTOR to digitize,
preserve and extend access to Journal of Music Theory.

http://www.jstor.org

REPORT

THE 1994 LANCASTER UNIVERSITY
MUSIC ANALYSIS CONFERENCE

Richmond
Browne

A decade had passed since the firstBritMACand it remainedonly to
venture North, beyond Liverpool and Birmingham and Manchester,
nearly to Carlisle, nearly to Hadrian'sWall. After London (twice) and
Cambridge,Oxfordand Southampton,'one welcomed the westrenwind
sweeping in from the Irish Sea.
Friday afternoon
In reportson conferences previous, this reviewer has often found a
"theme"runningthroughvariouspapers.Thoughnone of the BritMACs
to datehavebeen organizedaroundan announcedsingle topic, it has often
happened that one seemed to come to the surface early on-perhaps
because some issue of emergingimportwas on the minds of severalparticipants as they worked in solitude but in a community where notions
385

rapidlybecame slogans in the all-but-instant
dialogue now availableon
electronic mail. These suggestions, once stated with felicity, are developed informally in subsequentdiscourse through graceful allusions to
some earlierspeaker'sformulation-or they may indeedbe the sole property of each listener as the conference progresses,in an interiorperception/cognitionoperationnot unlike the very one we call music listening.
At anyrate,for this reporter, Cross (WolfsonCollege, Cambridge),
Ian
soundedin the
by his very title: "MusicAnalysis and Music Perception,"
opening paperan intellectualnote that seemed to echo in many following statements.Put simply,it runsthus:as studies of music as a cognitive
processgrow in numberand depth,it is becomingclearerandclearerthat
there is a real and importantdifference between theories of musicderivedfrom musical practice,the analysis of scores, the study of music
as notatedor translated
into languageor othermodes of informingabout
music, and theories of musical cognition-the supposedworkingsof the
brainas it perceives sound across time, categorizesit and its reactionsto
it into at least proto-musicalevents, recategorizesthese things into memory (and thereby alters that memory), and utilizes its own strategiesto
conductfurtherperceptionsin the light of these experiences.Thatthe apparatuswe use to talk about, formalize, or abstractmusic is not necessarily(not even possibly) identicalto the interiordialogueof musicalperis
ception/cognition(increasingly seen as completely interdependent) a
principleof real significance. It may be centralto the revampingof our
discussion, as in the "new"musicology, properlyseen. A new ontology
calls fortha new epistemology.
Cross said this sortof thing and much more, with greaterelegance.As
he put it, without a delineationof the two realms, cognitive science and
musical experience, it will often be the case that one will claim to subsume the other.The error,as formulatedby Bruner,took place when "the
cognitive revolution [was] divertedfrom its originatingimpulse by the
the
computational
metaphor," firstrevolutionhavingbeen convincedthat
"thecentralconcept of a humanpsychology is meaning"shapedby "intentional states [and] the symbolic systems of the culture."2
Nicholas
Cook has referredto the notion that folk psychology can safely be ignoredas the deletion of the listeneras a free agent.
and Narmour,Cross
Evaluatingthe theories of Lerdahl/Jackendoff
finds their work only partially successful in evoking the explanatory
power of science to deal with unconscious acts by individuals.Recent
work by Johnson and Laird (based on that of George Lakoff) suggests
thatthe epistemology of science itself is more culturallydeterminedthan
positivism would have us believe, and Churchland's
hopes thatcognitive
science will producea new and improvedfolk psychology must be seen
as ambitious, for now.3Once again, a warning against misplaced concreteness.
386

The very next paper, "In Search of a Past for Schenker"by Allan
of
Keiler(BrandeisUniversity),gave a powerfuldemonstration the difficulties involvedin definingthe work of a majormusical analystand analytical theoristwith respectto thatof seminal figuresbefore and afterhis
time. Keiler,surelythe most deeply linguisticof currenttheorists,offered
strong evidence that conflationsof Schenkerwith the organicismattributed to Goethe are mostly "fossilized encomia,"and that the seemingly
prescienthints of generativethinkingone can find in Schenkerfrom the
perspectiveof our Chomskiantime could not have been known as such
to him, since the concepts of rule-governedsystems were simply not yet
available.Thus the beauty of so many of Schenker'sstatementslies in
their isolated musical convincingness, not in their orderly or explicit
derivations.
They mustbe takenlargely as theoriesof music, not of musical cognition.
Voice Leading,
GregoryProctor(Ohio StateUniversity),in "Idealized
an Analytic Universal," satisfiedone of the manycompletionmanias
has
which activatetonal music's surfaces.Using an elegant gamut notation,
his idealized voice leadings accountfor all of the voice-leading connections between tonal triads and seventh chords. Some possibilities are
eternally impossible/fascinating,like the resolution of V7 to I in root
position if both are in complete form. Othersoccur more thanonce, and
require context for disambiguation.Schenker presented only applications of these, in competingstyles;WilliamBenjamin4 Allen Winold5
and
have presented similar but more constrainedtreatmentsof the notion;
Proctorwould seem to have exhaustedthe topic.
But RichardCohn (Universityof Chicago), talkingabout"Third
Relations, CommonTones, and HexatonicSystems,"was able to offer a useful extension of one kind of voice-leading in triadicchains whose successive connections are classically legitimate,but which quickly lead to
third-chains peculiarvalue in the music of Franck,Liszt,
of
major-minor
In
Mahler,andWagner. such patterns(e.g., A;+, G#-,E+, E-, C+, C-, A;+,
etc., in Riemanniannotation),the triadsstill function as acoustic norms,
but little remainsof harmonicfunctionin any traditionalsense. In cognitive terms,what is being demonstrated thatthere are always more patis
ternsavailablethanany one system can makeuse of. Stylistic novelty lies
in the utilizationof these possibilities.
Lancasterbeing both near and far from London, people were still arriving or alreadydepartingeven as Fridayevening's banquettook place.
ConferencedirectorAnthonyPople and his assistantsKirstyKirkpatrick
and Lucy Warrenhad everythingnicely organized,however,and excellent food was received with pleasure, as were all too brief remarksby
Society for Music Analysis and Conference Program chair Jonathan
Dunsby.Although this was the first BritMACto be held outside of London and Oxbridgewithoutparticipation the Royal MusicologicalAsby
387

sociation, a very satisfying numberof musical scholarsfrom every level
of academic practicein the United States and GreatBritain(and points
beyond) were to be found conversingwarmlyas the evening went on.
Saturday morning
On a cold morning, Raymond Monelle (University of Edinburgh)
warmly translatedeveryone to a faun's afternoon with the charm and
power of a master interpreter.He found "Semantic Opposition in
Debussy"between the literarydialectic and musical unity of this characterpiece, not, as Ratnerhas shown for classical music, at the level of first
and second subjects,butjuxtaposedby Debussy in the firsttwo phrases,
which Monelle sees as a "shepherd'spastoral= flute/syrinxchromatic
insistence"and a "woodlandpastoral= hornpentatonyin developmental
multiplicity,"Convincing though his presentationwas, some listeners
challenged the detailed reading of each theme, hearing/readingsome
of
interpenetration the two images. Monelle's reply was as artful as
Debussy could have wished.
At the end of his own abstractfor "Hearing/Reading
Beethoven's
Cavatina,Op. 130, mvt. 5," Robert Pascall (Universityof Nottingham)
claims that "Beethoven'sCavatina 'speaks' of sublime motions of the
humanspiritthrougha play of oratoricand operaticconventionsmanipulated to delineate serenity,disruption,and resolution. Such hermeneusis emphaticallydoes not constitutemetaphor,
neitheris it over-interpretation (using but marginalisingthe piece); ratherit validatesitself as an
explicative humanistinterpretation,
provisionallyfulfilling the semiosis
of the piece, and forming an essential aspect of holistic analysis."Coming from a graduatestudent,that would constitutehubris.From Pascall,
it is simplejustice. Surely there is room in someone's catalog for a collection of the teachingsof this master;I rememberno more comprehensive and convincing one-hourdidact.
Only twice during LancMAC94 were we asked to choose between
conflicting sessions. My colleague John Covach (University of North
Texas then, Universityof North Carolinawhen you read this) attended
two of them while I went to the others.Covach reports:
In her "BeyondLe Boeuf: AnalyzingMilhaud'sFifth ChamberSymDeborah
Mawer(University Newcastle-upon-Tyne) out to
of
set
phony,"
reclaimthe "seriousness purpose" Milhaud's
of
in
that
music,arguing the
structural
sophistication
presentin many of the composer'sworks has
and
In
to
gone largelyunnoticed, thusunappreciated. addition presenting
a rich barrage convincinganalytical
of
examples,Ms. Maweralso consideredMilhaud's1923 theoretical
paperin La RevueMusicale,"Polytonaliteet Atonalite."
While the scope of the paperallowed us only a
388

musicandthe theoretical
glimpseintothe detailsof Milhaud's
underpinit is evidentthatfurther
workon thistopicwill provide
botha fuller
nings,
workandthe deeperappreciation this musicthat
of
pictureof Milhaud's
Ms. Mawerenvisions.
Covachcontinues:
The paperby Dai Griffiths
titled "'Some(OxfordBrookesUniversity)
times it's hardto be a woman':Fixities and Flexibilitiesof Genderin
Recent Song,"was both thought-provoking,
addressingwhat are ultiand
matelyvery seriousandcrucialissues in interpretation, delightfully
filled with carefullychosen musicalexamplesdrawnfrom
entertaining,
both popularart and music. Workingoutwardfrom Roland Barthes'
famousessay, "TheGrainof the Voice,"Griffiths
exploredhow text setof
with the contextof the
ting andthe performance the text can interact
text in very surprising
ways. Three interrelated
questionswere posed:
"What
whena textproduced a womanis sungor set by a man?
happens
by
Or when a text by a man is sung or set by a woman?And how do we
understand song, as women and as men?"Weavinga paththrough
that
musicalexamplesby Elliott Carter(settingtexts of RobertLowell and
Elizabeth
Griffiths
illustrated a
in
Bishop),the Smiths,andPolly Harvey,
fashionhow an interpretation
focusedon issuesof gendercan
compelling
and
conopen up a very interesting worthwhileset of music-analytical
cerns.

While John Covach was with Mawer and Griffiths,this reporterwas
enjoying two highly professionalrevelationsof classical magic. William
Renwick (McMasterUniversity)showed us the secret of "HiddenFugal
Paths: [by] Interpreting Middlegroundin Handel's Fugues."Partof
the
the way Handel managed the composing-out of fundamentalstructure
was (in contrastto Bach's sectionalhandlingof each entryor set of them)
due to his trick of dove-tailinginteriorcadences via ingano: a deceptive
downturningof the leading tone to a flattedseventh, so that a V-I close
becomes V-V/IV-IV,etc. This and other exploitations of tonal/modal
ambiguitywere nicely handledin a well-plannedpaper.
Michael Spitzer (University of Durham) needed sleight-of-handto
avoid foot-in-mouth while navigating the treacherouswaters of schematic Gestalt-grunding/reification is impossible to continue this way,
(it
but he did, brilliantly).In a reading saved from excruciatingdetail only
by creditinghis audience with powers of auditorydisenjambment
equal
to the exquisitecombinatoriality Mozart'smusic, "MusettesandComof
binationSchemain Mozart'sC MajorStringQuartet"
madeGjerdingen's
1-7/4-3schema into a continuousmosaic of 1-7 (T5) 1-7 becoming4-3, 43. This trick depends on the intervallicrarityof ics 1 and 6, of course,6
and constitutes a version of the ingano that Renwick found in Handel.
389

Where Meyer saw a gap to fill (in 1-7,2-1), Gjerdingen7
posits a cultural
artifactcapableof deformationand/orprolongation,and thus gives us, in
Spitzer'sterms,"newlinks between the realmsof tonalprolongationand
topical reference(planes which Agawu thinks are distinct)."Sometimes
the sheer flood of words from a really fluent speaker (Milton Babbitt,
Alan Street?)can outruneveryone in the arroyosof a lecturehall-but it
is fun if you can float. And here again the line between what music can
do (has done) and what the braindoes (how it does it) may be seen as a
limen: a boundarywhich will eventuallybecome a cottage industry.
Saturday afternoon
Alan Street (University of Keele) on "'Von Heute auf Morgen':
Schoenbergand the New Criticism."Schoenbergsubsumes his successors, whose glossia almostdisplacehis texts.OnlyAdoro has anticipated
present-daypostmodernity,where imitation is a cop-out for attempted
murder.Yet as Babbitt, Boulez, and Keller cannot decide which sin to
commit, they follow him, who was willing to die to save himself... or
was it music ... from ... ethnicity?
I'll go out and come in again.
Schoenbergand the cult of personality-the cult has one father/Babbitt, Boulez, Keller compete to be the sons-Taruskin sees this not as
homage,but as a poietic fall-music with its manufactured
technology is
sanctionedonly locally-a politics of exclusion-Taruskin emphasizes
the historyof performances,not writings-Bloom says composersmake
history,they don't rewriteit-Dika Newlin asks why Schoenberg'sbio is
so hardto write:she feels overpoweredby its subject-S has usurpedthe
authorityto define his own place-Berg: "he is the father"-man as
idea-a visionary-pure logos-lonely prophet/moralist-a modelof the
Jewish-feared God would not allow [what?]... sense of destinyrespondingto [other] genius and tradition,to authority,constitutes aunot
tradition, just in music... David
thority-upholding Jewish/Christian
Gross: traditionis a facsimile-something "seen again."Now a historiographyof the Schoenbergtradition:
(1) Babbit. Near positivist, active critic of the European,pluralist/
American;paradoxicallya studentof S's receptionhistorypragmatist
anti-Adomo (because B is a structuralist), sees S as anti-system,as
yet
empiricist.
(2) Boulez Condemns S's American conciliatorypieces-condemns
memory-S is Dead through[?] his successors.
(3) Hans Keller.Defenderof Schoenbergand Freud,contra Schenker
andthe thesis of repressedtonalbackgrounds-censure of Boulez as narcissistic-notes Viennesetraditionof protestingtradition-likes Stravin390

sky (who has geographic[?] limitations)and Britten-creativity = resistance, not in works but in paradigms.
Adomo. [pre-]EchoesBoulez: aesthetic resistance= a fault common
to all modem; new music levels, and becomes flat
Mann.Dr.Faustus-(mis)-paradigmaticof man-Faustian mystery,
of
identity-order/chaos-Christian vs. Nazi-in Genesis of [the?] Novel:
serialismbecomes more in the book than
vom Heute auf Morgen: a parody of trad/pop-a Zeitoper.Irony =
self-hate.
Farbenmelodie(S in 1951: competitivew/Webem)
The division of poietics and history-theory/analysis should sublimate dialectic process-Patricia Carpenter:reading S back into history-Hanslick-[Severine] Neff: organicism [is derived] from others'
mechanics [?][!]
Epistemologygroundedin the secular-Fr.: "noone can kill in absentia"-myth of origin/visiblepast-visible theology: simulacra:devaluation of the sign-ideology respondsto ideology
Geniusor de-mystification-defying reduction-Barth: unbindingreleases gender... race... ethnicity-Ringer: S as Jew-Judy Brown: S
had to submitto his differentness,yet 12-toneis to redeem [what?]from
"Jewishness" .
..
Revision liberates,but may be political
the Politics of identity:a generalreconciliationneeded-musicology:
all forms of humanness-"music into discourse"-against transcendence-is value what musicology is about?
Listening to Alan Street is nearly impossible, unless you are some
combinationof KevinKorsyn,CarolynAbbatte,andAlan Street.Yet here
is his abstract:
As chief radicalamongearly twentieth-century
musical modernists,it
is unremarkable
that Schoenberg should subsequentlyhave become
the focus of intense critical scrutiny.Less readily appreciableis the
extentto which this criticismhas formeda dominantimage of the composer. For example, the writings of, among others, Boulez, Babbitt,
and Keller are customarily taken to represent a form of apology
endemicto contemporary
creativerevolution:a mediatinginfluencein
the face of technicaland aestheticalienation.Such interpretations
are
then held to be supplementary Schoenberg'sextensive self-analyto
ses. Yet if only because they are understoodto provide a more systematicrealisationof ideaspartiallyformulated theirinventor,
these
by
secondary expositions acquire a primary significance which consequentlystandsto displace the original subjectof inquiry.
That Schoenbergstudies have nonetheless maintainedan orthodox
critical perspectivemay be explained by their strong orientationto391

wardscompositionand the context of its production.By contrast,the
aspect of receptionhas been relativelyneglected except for the signal
contributionsof the composer's most rigorous critic, Theodor W.
Adomo. AlthoughAdorno'sanalysisof modem musicalphilosophyis
groundedin a conceptionof structural
autonomy,its espousal of nonidentityplaces it in close proximityto the differentiallogic of present
Moreover,Adorno'scommitmentto criticism
day post-structuralism.
as an element of necessity also anticipatesthe factitiouscondition of
postmoderity wherein interpretive
interpositionbecomes omnipresent. The prospect of a postmoder interpretation Adomo which
of
arises from this conjunctionalso invites speculationover a postmodern conception of Schoenberg, a question which may be addressed
with reference to writings by Roland Barthes, David Gross, Michel
FoucaultandJeanBaudrillard, well as ThomasMann'snovel, Docas
tor Faustus.
The paper following Alan Street's was by Julie Brown (Emmanuel
College, Cambridge)and led a quiet audience to the safer ground of
piece-centered discussion. "In the Beginning was the Song: Allegory,
Theory,and Schoenberg'sMusical Idea"exploredSchoenberg'stropeof
his new music as an emergence of divine creative authority,seeing the
first song of Das Buch der hangenden Gdrten in both theoreticaland
poetic senses as an evocationof Creationitself. This sortof thingrequires
a sure touch, considerablediffidence,and a close readingof the poem in
question. Brown's practiceof sensitive musical analysis was reassuring
at thisjuncture.
Tea.Tobacco.The fadingwarmthof Autumnat the edge of the Empire
... well, the Roman empire, then ... an American reportertalks with
British friends and thinks a bit too much about tomorrow'straipse at
Vindolandaand HaltwhistleBur. Back to the last paper.
The last speakeron a Saturday
afternoonhadbetterbe forthright,
even
challenging.BruceCampbell(MichiganStateUniversity)was ready,and
his "TheGraphicalPresentation MusicalAnalysis by Computer"
of
went
well. He gave an overview of recent advances in CD-ROM technology
using Apple Computer'sHypertalklanguageaimed at universityinstructors and musician-programmers-twokinds of people who seldom share
their individualexpertises-and thereby risked dauntingthe first while
boring the second. Many were the questions, so successful was the presentation.
Another fine dinner (a bit pricey for some) gave the acknowledged
principalof the Britishtheoreticalrenascencehis always-welcomedtime
to place things in perspective.ArnoldWhittall(King's College, London)
received the warm reception which surely is his due. And then the real
business of the conference went on into the late evening: talk with old
392

friends not on the program (Craig Ayrey, R.J. Samuels, J.A. Ellis,
Nicholas Cook, EstherCavett-Dunsby,
Jim Samson, Naomi Cumming)
aboutpeople notpresentbutwarmlyremembered
(DerekPuffett,Christopher Wintle, Allen Forte, Carl Schachter). Much talk about watching
young scholars turn slowly into veterans,and newer ones emerge with
confidence,aboutthe similarlist of valuablepeople in the United States
whom one always looks for at an SMT meeting, and how wonderfulit
would be if the two groups really knew each other.There is a sense in
which music is an entirelyprivatematter,but none in which talk aboutit
can be.
Sunday morning
The now-familiarinnovationof the postersession was up and running
all weekend, with much comment for the presentersstandingby to defend their work. One can mention only a few: MinnaMiller (University
of Kentucky)on large scale in Schumann'sFantasie; Tom Royall (Universityof Keele) on perceivedoctave equivalence;Neil Todd(University
of Sheffield)on perceptualanalysis;Jack Boss (BrighamYoungUniversity) on Schoenbergand Schenker;John Covachon Schoenberg'sotherworldliness; David Smythe (Lousiana State University) on Schenker's
Formenlehre.
There is something quite satisfactoryabout being able to
look at an argument the selfpaced,nonserialway a posterallows-and
in
then ask the authorwhat she meant, if he had consideredyour own pet
idea, what will come next.
But the morning'spapershad begun and one hurriedto eitherWason
and Moore, or to ap Si6n and Browne. Of the formerpair,William Renwick writes:
In "APitch-Class
Motivein Webern's
W.
'GeorgeLieder,' 3,"Robert
Op.
Wason(EastmanSchool of Music) gave us a highly empirical"tonal"
readingof the piece-tonal in the sense thatthe pitchD is a focal point,
a pointof reference,
sometimesan objectof motionor repose.The reading was fair and as objectiveas such a readingcan be. Whatthe paper
could have used was a more generaldiscussionof the otherprocesses
methodin Webern's
involved,and what we know of the compositional
atonalwork.
Renwick continues:
I hadno previousacquaintance the musicof Barraque, foundthe
with
so
materialin "TonalRemnants Grandiloquence: Relationship
and
The
of
MaverickSerialPracticeto Expressionin the Worksof JeanBarraque"
in
Moore(RoyalAcademyof Music)did
interesting its own right.Jeremy
a goodjob of explaining "healthy" in whichBarraque
the
usedserial
way
393

how
of
withoutbecomingservant them,anddemonstrated he
techniques
tonalelementsandreferences
as
withinhis serialpractice
accommodated
dramatic
a meansof heightening
expression.
was attentiveto Pwyll ap Sion (Coleg GogMeanwhile,your reporter
ledd Cymru,Bangor) as he gave us a taste of [Michael] "Nyman'sNeurological Opera:Science quaArt."The text (andtitle of the work)is from
Oliver Sacks's The Man WhoMistookHis Wife a Hat. The principal
for
characteris a musician who is sufferingfrom acute visual agnosia (i.e.,
he can see but does not know that he can). Although the patient is derangedand deluded in many ways, when the plot calls for him to reluctantly sing some Schumann,his performanceof Ich grolle nicht is without flaw.This occasions much talk in the opera,and skillfully by ap Si6n,
about the sense in which science is deconstruction,and music a science
corporealresonancesof the imaginarymind."
restoring"theabstracted
This reviewerconducted,at the 3rd ICMPCin Liege in July 1994 and
againat the SMT meeting in Tallahasseein November,gatheringsof persons who had read enough of AmericanNobelist neurobiologistGerald
M. Edelman'swork8to be interestedin discussing the extent to which a
new and ratherpowerfulview of the workingsof the brainmight invigorate some questions for music perceptionand cognition.A similarmeeting took place at the presentLancMAC,but will not be reviewedhereand
indeed, its purposewas not expositorybut exploratory, that end was
achieved.
Two more majorpapersremained,even as trainschedules beckoned.
The University of Lancasteris situated,like so many modem monastic
colleges, on a remotehillside well away from the presumablydistracting
noise of its pronominalsite. This city lover finds little to recommendin
such rustication,butperhapsothersenjoyed the sense of being marooned
with little to do but pursuethe intellectualfleece.
Michael Russ (University of Ulster at Jordanstown)can always be
countedon for a fact-filled,beautifullyorganizedanalysis with some further point in mind, and his "CastingLight on Musorgsky'sSunless" did
not disappoint.Russ has a greattalentfor seeing affectualsignificancein
analytic detail of the seemingly most ordinarysort. The pivotal song in
the cycle is "Be Bored";in this careful reader'shands, dissonance becomes deceit, simplicity sarcasticbanality,the piano society, the composer the poet and the vocal part, and reality unbearable.It sounds
forced, but it comes off like a Carl Schachteror EdwardCone masterstroke.Here is anotherwriterwhose work should be made availableto a
wider professionalpublic.
Last of all, and perfectly comfortablewith it, JonathanKramer(Columbia University)used every bit of his time with an enormousdeconstructioncalled "TheFinaleof Mahler'sSeventhSymphonyViewedfrom
394

a PostmodernPerspective."Kramerwas one of the first music theorists
His
to see beyondstructuralism. workhas been consistentlybuilton stubborn psychological insights about disconnectedness,temporalcrosscut,
interfusionof detail, what Frommcalled long ago (approximately)"the
dreamer'sdisplacementof accent."So postmodernismwas waiting for
and
Kramer, Mahleris not the only humanbeing one can find in history
The technical stuff in a Kramerdiscursion
waiting to be misunderstood.
is all in plain view: in Mahlereverythinghappensout of phase, migrates
and interpenetrates,
takes place out of turn,reachingan emulsion which
is a "non-teleologicalform that is nonetheless tonal."There were times
talk
duringKramer's when the audienceseemed restless,as if thingswere
getting a bit close to home. Please read my first sentence again.
The end of LancMAC94was thatit calmly dissipated.The Society for
Music Analysis now runs these things; it held a boardmeeting, but saw
no reason to have a general one. From ClaphamCommon to the slopes
above MorecambeBay, the enterprisehas attainedcorporatestatus and
misplacedits doubts.Well done.
NOTES
1. Forreports this author KCLMAC andCUMAC86, held at King'sColon
84
by
and
see
lege London Cambridge
University,
respectively, JMT31 (1987): 165-71;
on OXMAC atOxfordUniversity, JMT (1989):228-36; on CityUMAC
see
33
88,
91, at City University
London,see JMT36 (1992): 207-16; on SotoMAC93, at
the University Southampton, JMT38 (1994):355-67.
of
see
2. JeromeBruner,
Acts of Meaning(Cambridge London:Harvard
and
University
Press),33.
3. Paul M. Churchland,Scientific Realism and the Plasticity of Mind (London: Cam-

Press, 1979),pp. 107-119.
bridgeUniversity
4. See WilliamBenjamin,
"Pitch-Class
in
in
Counterpoint TonalMusic," MusicTheBrowne(New York:
AcademicPress, 1987):
ory: Special Topics,ed. Richmond
1-32.
5. See Allen Winold, Harmony: Patterns and Principles (Englewood Cliffs, N.J.:

Prentice-Hall,
1986).
6. See Richmond
of
Browne,"Tonal
Implications the DiatonicSet,"In TheoryOnly
5/6-7 (1981):3-21.
7. See RobertGjerdingen, Classic Turnof Phrase (Philadelphia:
A
Universityof
Press, 1988).
Pennsylvania
8. See Gerald M. Edelman, Bright Air, Brilliant Fire: On the Matter of the Mind
(New York: Basic Books, 1992); The Remembered Present: A Biological Theory
of Consciousness ( 1989): Topobiology:An Introduction to Molecular Embryology
(1988); and Neural Darwinism: The Theory of Neuronal Group Selection (1987).

395

