Yale University Department of Music

Remembering David Kraehenbuehl
Author(s): Charles Burkhart
Source: Journal of Music Theory, Vol. 41, No. 2 (Autumn, 1997), pp. 183-192
Published by: Duke University Press on behalf of the Yale University Department of Music
Stable URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/843957
Accessed: 16/12/2009 11:07
Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of JSTOR's Terms and Conditions of Use, available at
http://www.jstor.org/page/info/about/policies/terms.jsp. JSTOR's Terms and Conditions of Use provides, in part, that unless
you have obtained prior permission, you may not download an entire issue of a journal or multiple copies of articles, and you
may use content in the JSTOR archive only for your personal, non-commercial use.
Please contact the publisher regarding any further use of this work. Publisher contact information may be obtained at
http://www.jstor.org/action/showPublisher?publisherCode=duke.
Each copy of any part of a JSTOR transmission must contain the same copyright notice that appears on the screen or printed
page of such transmission.
JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide range of
content in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and facilitate new forms
of scholarship. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.

Duke University Press and Yale University Department of Music are collaborating with JSTOR to digitize,
preserve and extend access to Journal of Music Theory.

http://www.jstor.org

REMEMBERING
DAVID KRAEHENBUEHL

Burkhart
Charles

founderand first editor of
On January3, 1997, David Kraehenbuehl,
the Journalof Music Theory,andmy onetimementorandlifelong friend,
died of a massive heartattacknearhis home in Trempealeau,
Wisconsin,
where he had lived with his family for the past twelve years. He was
seventy-three.
David was the son
Born September15, 1923, in Champaign-Urbana,
the
of Kathrynand John Otto Kraehenbuehl, lattera distinguishedprofessor of electrical engineering at the University of Illinois. David's
intellectualand musical gifts were given every opportunity
extraordinary
for growth,and he early developedinto a brilliantpianistand precocious
composer.Enteringthe University at age sixteen, he graduatedin 1943
with a double degree-a Mus.B. in piano and a B.A. in German and
Colonel in command
Mathematics-and also with the rankof Lieutenant
of the student Signal Corps of the ROTC. He then entered the Signal
Corpsofficertrainingschool, andin 1944 went on to militaryintelligence
school at Camp Ritchie, Maryland,where he was trainedas a cryptologist. While there, an army friend gave him the opportunityto hear a
recordingof Hindemith'sMathis der Maler, which sparkeda desire to
study with Hindemithafter the war. In 1945 he saw duty in the Pacific,
of
eventuallybecoming officer-in-charge the EighthArmy Signal Center
183

in Yokohama.
Musteredout as a captainin 1946, he enteredYale School
of Music the following year.Also in 1947 he met Marie Marek,a cello
studentat the University of Illinois School of Music. They marriedin
August and Marie accompaniedDavid to Yale, where, as a cellist, she
would participate the rich musical life of the universityand town.
in
At thattime the many ex-GIs, who were older thanthe otherstudents
and eager to get on with their delayed education,made the Yale School
of Music (like many otherschools in this country)an exciting place. But
the most exciting thing was the presence of the highly sought-afterPaul
Hindemith,who had been teaching both theory and composition there
since 1940. To choose which studentshe would accept, Hindemithgave
a competitive written exam each year to all who wanted to work with
him. When David took it, therewere twenty-oddapplicantsand only one
remainingplace in Hindemith'sgroup. I recall David's telling me that
one of the requiredproblems on the exam was to write a tonal triple
canon arounda given plainchant.(Could today's theorymajorsdo this?)
Hindemithgave the place to David, and would later call him "the most
gifted studentI have ever had."
Hindemith's students majored in either theory or composition, dependingon theirstrengths.David was originallya theorymajor,and was
slated for a 1950 graduation.But in the spring of 1949 Hindemithwas
invitedto give the NortonLecturesat Harvard following school year,
the
and what to do with his Yale studentsbecame a problem.In David's case
the solution was to have him write, duringthe last month of the school
and
year,a Scherzo,Variations, Fuguefor pianoandwinds-a very exciting piece whose premiereI heard-and graduatehim with a Mus.M. in
Composition.
At graduation
David was also announcedas that year's winnerof the
School's Ditson Fellowship for Foreign Study. Thanks to the Ditson
money, he and Marie were able to spend the next year (1949-50) at the
Schola Cantorumin Basel, where his studies included chant, performance practice,and harpsichord. also sang in the Basel Kammerchor
He
and played flute (his second instrument)with the Basel Kammerorchester,both groups underthe directionof Paul Sacher.
On a recommendationfrom Hindemith, David was made assistant
professor of music history and theory in 1950 at Colorado College in
ColoradoSprings. (The college was somethingof a pre-Aspenartscenter then, and Hindemithhad been an invited guest professorin the summer of 1949.) During David's three years there, in additionto teaching,
he performed
weekly as a chambermusic pianist,foundedandconducted
concerts by the Colorado College Collegium Musicum, and served as
music editor,critic, and essayist on music for the ColoradoSpringsFree
Press.And, not least, he composedan impressivenumberof pieces, many
of which were performedin Colorado Springs and elsewhere. Notable
184

amongthese was Diptych,writtenfor theYale ConcertBand, and several
dance department ColoradoColof
ballets producedby the remarkable
lege, which was headedby Molly Lynn,a studentof HanyaHolm.
careeras a conductor
By 1953 Hindemith'sburgeoninginternational
made it impossible for him to continue at Yale. At Hindemith'ssuggestion, David was appointedassistantprofessor at Yale School of Music,
wherehe served as head of the Music TheoryDepartment,
taughta variety of graduatecourses, and directedMaster'sthesis work in theory.He
was very popularwith the students,who foundhim a charismatic
teacher,
and was also highly esteemed by the School's dean, LutherNoss. Also,
in 1955 he was appointedmusical directorof the New Haven Chorale,a
position he held for the next five years.
In 1955 David conceived the idea of a journaldevoted exclusively to
the subjectof music theory-the firstof its kind.He took the idea to Dean
Noss, who gave it his enthusiasticsupportand helped set up an editorial
board.The myriadtasks requiredto make the idea a reality were all entrustedto David and his one assistant,Donald Loach, then a beginning
instructor.
Everyone-board, editorialstaff, authors-worked for love.
It was March, 1957, when Volume 1, Number 1, clad in a Yale-blue
cover, made its debut. Page 1 was devoted to a "Foreword"(signed
deserves quoting in full:
"DK")whose noble opening paragraph
In centuries
of
the
pastthe formulation laws regarding practiceof music
was regarded the highestaim for a musician;
as
and,in manyinstances,
musicallaws were the inspiration the sourcefor more generallaws
or
materialor spiritual
regarding
experience.Music was the image of the
universe,hence, a source of truth;and it was the music theoristwho
and
bothnatural divinelaw.Butin our
and
sought,discovered, expressed
owntimeit is theraremusician
who knowshowhis artoffersa key to universalunderstanding.
Music theoryhas become a disciplinein stylistic
definitionor, still less, a system of nomenclature classification
and
that
offersno validlaws evenregarding
music.It is to the restoration music
of
morethana necessary
discitheoryas morethana didacticconvenience,
that
as, in fact,a modeof creativethought thisjournalis dedicated.
pline,
Noble but naive, some readersof today might think, but there was far
more to Kraehenbuehl's
stance thannostalgiafor an unrecapturable
past.
The Forewordgoes on to cite the "lackof an availableforum"as the reason why "theoretical
discovery has languished,"and expresses the hope
thatthisjournal"will serve as a focal point for ... an exchange of ideas,
as a stimulantto those isolatedcreativetheoristswho have wonderedwho
and where their brethrenare, [and] as an encouragementto the student
who is still unawareof the vast unexploredareasof musical thoughtthat
remainto excite his imagination." then outlines the differenttypes of
It
contributionthe editors plan to include-articles on analyticalor peda185

gogical technique, studies in speculative areas, translationsof primary
documents-as well as variousadditionalfeaturessuch as book reviews
and a "theoryforum"for briefercontributions directdiscussion, and
and
it ends with this graciousinvitation:
This ... publication bornof the belief thatthe creations the music
of
[is]
theoristarein needof a stage.Hereis the stage.We awaityourentrances
withrealanticipation.
Eight months later,Volume 1/2 (November 1957) again began with a
one-page statementsigned by "DK."Entitled"AMatterof Policy,"it first
spelled out in more detail the boundariesof the areas to be covered-a
point many correspondentshad questioned. But more significantly,the
statementwent on to express chagrin that, since the largest proportion
by far of both subscribersand submittersof papers had been historical
musicologists ratherthan theorists, the Journal had not yet been embracedby the groupfor which it was created.Again an earnestinvitation
is extended:
We firmlybelievethattherearetheorists,
and
composers, theoryteachers
the
Thatthey
throughout countrypossessedof considerable
originality.
have not writtendown theirideas to date is understandable
since there
was little or no likelihoodof publication. standreadyto offer that
We
"Hereis the stage."
opportunity....As we saidin ourpreviousforeword:
we
the
Unfortunately, find ourselvesstill awaitingwith anticipation entranceof thosethatwe hopedmostwouldmakeuse of it.
Volume 2/1 (April 1958) begins with the thirdand last of DK's oneHerethe friendly
page openers,this one entitled"Whatis MusicTheory?"
tone of the firsttwo seems to give way to a certainacerbity,as thoughthe
writeris beginningto lose his patience(andon occasion David could royally lose it; I hearhim enunciatingthis title with an emphasison the "is").
One imagines that Editor Kraehenbuehl been receiving papersthat
had
seemed to him inappropriate the Journal. Clearly he felt the need to
for
clear up the "confusionregarding properbusiness of musical theory."
the
theories,aesthetictheories,theories
Manyseem to believethatacoustical
of perception,
indeed,any theorieswhose validitymay be tested in the
realm of musical activity are musical theories.This is nonsense.The
of
properobjectof musicaltheoryis music, thatpattern soundsin time
thatcomposers
construct transfer
to
theirexperienceas humanbeingsto
others.The objectof musicaltheoryis not sound,not time, not human
of
experience,but thatparticular
conjunction these thatwe call musical
experience.
186

He went on to emphasizethattheory must be distinguishedfromfact (he
would later pillory incompetenttheorists who argued for the "facts of
theory"),and that "factsshould not be confused with knowledge."
In music,soundis a fact,its measurement businessof the soundengithe
to
law
neer,its pertinence natural the businessof the acousticaltheorist,
its artistic
of
the
for
organization purposes communication businessof the
musictheorist.
later developed these and relatedideas in a full-length
Kraehenbuehl
which was read at the 1959 convention of the Music Teachers
paper
NationalAssociationin KansasCity,Missouri,andpublishedin JMT4/1
(April 1960) under the title "The Professional Music Theorist-His
His
HabitsandTraining." majorstatementon this subject,this essay outlines a broadand visionary agenda in vivid, eloquent language, and climaxes with a desciptionof "whata professionalmusic theoristmustbe":
He is firstandforemosta musician.His knowledgeof music,through
the
first-hand
music, should be
experienceof composingand performing
thanthatof any othermusician.Secondly,he is a skilledthinker,
greater
versedin thetechniques logicaldemonstration,
of
rational
proof, andverbal argument.
he
that
Thirdly, is a professional, is, he spendsthe major
out
portionof his time thinkingaboutmusic, searching the clues which
will leadto the development new andusefultheoretical
of
systems.As is
of
alwaysthe case, the creation new thingsrequires
thorough
knowledge
of the old. The professional
theorist,then,is also an experton theoretical
it
definition, becomesevident
systemsof the past ... Withthis summary
thata professional
theoristis, of course,a rarity.
And whatdoes the professionaltheoristactuallydo for the musicalworld?
Of course he would make a good theory teacher,but that is "theleast of
his contributions. main efforts are bent towardthe continuingdevelHis
of theoreticalknowledge."
And his constantconcernis to "reduce
opment
the area of unavoidablemisunderstanding"
between the contemporary
composerandthe performer.... [T]he theoristoperatesas a go-between,
an agent,whose functionis to keep the performer close behindthe comas
as possible."
poser
As we read Kraehenbuehl's
words today,they seem prescient,for the
revival of music theory as a serious discipline has become, as everyone
knows, a reality, and a genuine profession has developed exactly along
the lines he proposed, and even in the amount of time he estimated it
would take-"at least thirtyyears."True,the groundswellof this development was alreadyunderway when he wrote. But his clarioncall, and
above all the journalhe created,were powerfulcatalysts.1
187

In the late 50s, Kraehenbuehlalso published (with Edgar Coons, a
musician and psychologist) two highly original articles on the application of informationtheoryto musical analysis.2A few years laterhe also
Schmidt)"Onthe Developmentof Musical
published(with Christopher
a speculativearticle on microtonaltheory. (This subjecthad
Systems,"3
been an abidinginterestsince his studentdays, and he returned it late
to
in life in an article co-authoredwith ChristopherLight that is as yet
unpublished.)Also, his compositional career really took off during his
Yale teaching years (1953-60) with the writing of over twenty works,
four publicationsby Associated Music Publishers,and performances
by
notable artists and groups including Ralph Kirkpatrick,the Margaret
Hillis Chorale,and the Basel Kammerorchester
David continuedas editorof the Journaluntil 1960, when he suddenly
resignedfromYale. (The editorshipwas then takenover by Allen Forte.)
ChoirCollege in 1967-68, he
Except for a one-year stint at Westminster
would neveragainhold a college position. Since he was so well launched
on a brilliantacademiccareer,and since, in 1959,Yalehad appointedhim
associate professorwith tenure,many wonderedwhy he left. His reason
sprangfrom a very deep and lifelong conviction of the need for improving Americanmusic educationat the grass-rootslevel, and a deep desire
to do somethingaboutit. As he himself wrote in a personalcommunication just one year ago, "I realizedthat,fulfilling as work with a dozen or
so outstandinggraduatetheory students was, much needed to be done
for young music students,"meaning, in his case, young piano students.
So he left Yale to join with FrancesClarkand Louise Goss in founding
The New School for Music Study in Princeton,New Jersey.With them
he helped design the structureof the School, and as its Music Director
wrote a largebody of teachingpieces and otherpedagogicalmaterialfor
the Frances Clark Libraryfor Piano Students, published by SummyBirchard(now taken over by WarnerBrothers Publications).This includeda six-volumetheoryprogram, six-volumepianotechniqueseries,
a
and a six-volume gradedset of compositionscalled Jazz and Blues. (Is it
his
possible some presentreadersof JMThave encountered nameonly as
thatof the composerof these attractiveand witty pieces?)
An essential partof the School's mission was teachertraining,offered
both at the School itself and at short "seminars"
held on college campuses throughoutthe country.A regularfeatureof these seminarswas a
piano recital, and David frequentlyperformedin them. I recall hearing
him about 1965 in such a recitalheld at the Baldwin Studiosin New York
a
City, where he, togetherwith RichardChronister, fellow teacherat the
School, gave a breathtaking
performanceof a four-handwork of Schubert, a performanceespecially notable for the expressive rubatoin the
slower sections, where, in spite of the metricalfreedom, the two played
absolutely as one. (I should add that David played the piano with the
188

utmost freedom and grace, and looked so naturaldoing it that, as one
friendput it, "he seemedjust to grow out of the piano bench.")
In 1950 Kraehenbuehlhad begun to develop a "general theory of
music,"a topic that not only providedthe backgroundto his more technical workin information
theory,butthatwould informhis workin many
ways for the rest of his life. Overthe yearsit frequentlyenteredinto both
his writing and speaking, adaptedto the capacity and concerns of his
audience of the moment. It also deeply informedhis conception of his
work as a composer,concernedas thatconceptionwas with communication between composerand listener.
The longest and most developedstatementof this theorywas a paper,
"Toward GeneralTheory of Music,"which had grown out of extended
a
discussionswith EdgarCoons, andis relatedin its broadconcerns,though
differentfrom, earlier work by Meyer, Zuckerkandl,and Langer.This
paperrevealsKraehenbuehl's
deep convictionthatcomposerandlistener
must share a large body of experience in order for "meaning"to exist.
its
Thoughit remainedunpublished, mainideas arerepeatedat the beginning of the articlereferredto above on the professionaltheorist(JMT4/1,
62). Here Kraehenbuehl
proposesthatthe musicalcompositionarisesvia
a three-stageprocess of abstraction, firstbeing the composer's(probthe
of
ably unconscious)conceptualization his experienceof reality"inall its
levels of complexity-simple sensation,physical reality,emotionalrealNext the composer seeks to constructout of sound
ity, spiritualreality."
structuredabstractionsthat will representfor him-and, he
"similarly
In
believes, for others-his conceptsof reality." the finalstagehe attempts
to representhis imagined acoustical structurein visual terms-musical
notation-"very likely ... the least exact account of [his] initial artistic
Next the notatedmusic is takenup by the performer, first
"its
conception."
and most important
listener,... who translatesit again into sound."It is
this entireprocess of artisticcommunication,from the composer'stranslation of his concept of realityto the performer's
retranslation it back
of
into sound, that is the concern of the music theorist.The theorist'sspecific responsibilityis the "problemof how composers,past and present,
succeed in representing worldof conceptin the worldof sound."
the
First,
he mustdescribemeticulouslythe mannerin which musicalmaterialsare
organized. "He must then demonstratethe relationshipbetween these
organizationsand the world of non-musical realities,"that is, he must
answer the question[s]: ... "'To what do the organizedsounds refer?'
[and] 'How does the organizedpatternof sound representwhat it does?'
It is in the natureof 'theory' that each new body of musical literature,
indeed, each significantnew composition, will requirea revised or altogethernew answerto this question."
By 1967 David had developed new piano-pedagogical approaches
which, in my view, ultimatelystemmedfrom his theorieson conceptual189

ization and communication.He felt thatthe teacher,ratherthan attemptfor
ing to drawfrom the young studenta polished performance which he
was often not yet ready,shouldinsteadteach him (amongotherthings) to
"compose"at the keyboard.Unable to carryout his new methods at the
School, he left (though all the materialshe wrote for the ClarkLibrary
remainedandcontinuein printto the present),and,togetherwith Richard
ArtsAssoChronister ThomasMcBeth, foundedNationalKeyboard
and
ciates (NKAA), which developed and marketeda completely new piano
thatwas againpromotedvia innumerable
seminars,workstudyprogram
the
shops, and recitals throughout U.S. and Canada.4
NKAA also put out a magazine,Keyboard
Arts, devotedto intermediate and advancedteaching, for which David wrote innumerablearticles,
some on historicalperformance
issue in the teacher
practice,an important
trainingprogram,and some on theoreticalandanalytictopics.Among the
latter,two of the best are "The Rhetoric of Music," and "Communication-Process and Purpose"(in issues of 1982 and 1983), in which he
again presents ideas derived from his general theory, now couched in
termsrelevantto pianoteaching,andillustrated
with amusingmusicaland
verbalexamples,e.g., anArabtryingto communicatethe idea of "desert"
to an Eskimo.
David's life and work cannot be summarizedwithout mention of its
famreligious aspect. Born into a nominallyLutheranbut nonobservant
ily, in 1956 he became a convert to Roman Catholicism, and after that
time many of his compositions have a religious inspiration.Notable
among these are The Betrayal (1957), a motet cycle for Tenebrae,which
was widely performedand also recordedby the Richmond University
Chorus;Sermonsfor the Blessed (1958), text from JamesWeldonJohnson's God's Trombones, soloists andorchestra,
for
performedby the New
Haven Symphony;andA Nuptial Triptych
(1957), text from the Psalms,
performedby the New Haven Chorale at the MetropolitanMuseum of
Art in New Yorkand also by the Westminster
Choirin severalcities. Another is a musical commentaryfor cello and piano on T.S. Eliot's "Ash
writtenin 1966, and performedthe next year in Washington
Wednesday,"
D.C. by Joel Krosnickand Samuel Sanders.In 1967 his Mass of the People of God won a competitionsponsoredby the J.S. PaluchCompanyof
Chicago, a Catholic publishing house, and this led the next year to an
association with Paluch that lasted until 1996 (and which for a time he
ArtsAssopursuedsimultaneouslywith his work for NationalKeyboard
ciates). As managingeditor and later educationaldirectorof Paluch, he
composed and edited much music for use in the then new liturgy.But his
output of concert works of religious inspirationby no means ceasedwitness among many the Seven Archaic Images (1974), an orchestral
of
interpretation poems of Thomas Merton.
190

was actually more composer than theorist. He
David Kraehenbuehl
never stopped composing, and by the end of his life had written more
than 150 works(not includinghis pedagogicalpieces) thattraversea stylistic path from Hindemithiantonality,throughStravinskian"polyfunctionality,"to-from about 1958 on-composing with twelve-tone sets
and their subsets. Yet he always maintainedhis distinctive voice-not
only in his composition,but in everythinghe did. A profoundlycreative
to
musicianwho used all his many gifts, he made a unique contribution
Americanmusical life thathas yet to be fully assessed.5

191

NOTES
1. After writing this memoir, I was delighted to discover an appreciation of Kraehenbuehl in Patrick McCreless's excellent essay, "Rethinking Contemporary
Music Theory,"Keeping Score: Music, Disciplinarity, Culture, ed. Schwarz, Kassabian, and Siegel, 13-53: University of Virginia, 1997: "[Kraehenbuehl's] ability
to galvanize the energies of the new discipline and to articulate its goals clearly
was indispensable in establishing it on secure footing and making a place for it in
the university and conservatory . . . The intellectual program [he] outlines in the
foreword [to JMT 1(1)] is almost precisely the program that has been carried out
by music theory since 1957" (23).
2. "Informationas a Measure of Structurein Music," Journal of Music Theory 2(2):
127-61 (1958); "Information as a Measure of the Experience of Music," Journal
of Aesthetics and Art Criticism, 17(4): 510-22 (1959).
3. Journal of Music Theory 6(1): 32-65.
4. NKAA ceased operations in 1996. It is unfortunate that no publisher has been
found to take over and market its superb teaching materials.
5. My thanks to Martha Braden, Richard Chronister, Edgar Coons, Marie Kraehenbuehl, Donald Loach, Osea Noss, and Joseph Straus for their generous help in the
preparationof this memoir.

192

