Yale University Department of Music

Schenker's "Motivic Parallelisms"
Author(s): Charles Burkhart and Heinrich Schenker
Source: Journal of Music Theory, Vol. 22, No. 2 (Autumn, 1978), pp. 145-175
Published by: Duke University Press on behalf of the Yale University Department of Music
Stable URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/843395
Accessed: 15/12/2009 13:48
Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of JSTOR's Terms and Conditions of Use, available at
http://www.jstor.org/page/info/about/policies/terms.jsp. JSTOR's Terms and Conditions of Use provides, in part, that unless
you have obtained prior permission, you may not download an entire issue of a journal or multiple copies of articles, and you
may use content in the JSTOR archive only for your personal, non-commercial use.
Please contact the publisher regarding any further use of this work. Publisher contact information may be obtained at
http://www.jstor.org/action/showPublisher?publisherCode=duke.
Each copy of any part of a JSTOR transmission must contain the same copyright notice that appears on the screen or printed
page of such transmission.
JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide range of
content in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and facilitate new forms
of scholarship. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.

Duke University Press and Yale University Department of Music are collaborating with JSTOR to digitize,
preserve and extend access to Journal of Music Theory.

http://www.jstor.org

SCHENKER'S "MOTIVIC PARALLELISMS"

Charles Burkhart

INTRODUCTION
Central to Heinrich Schenker's theory of music is his concept of
hierarchically ordered structural levels (Schichten). According to this
concept, a level expressing a given degree of reduction governs-that is,
provides the structure of-the next most elaborate level, and is therefore
"higher" in rank to it. Schenker's gradual evolving of his theory-a task
spanning many years of his life-may be characterized as an ever-greater
awareness of ever-higher levels of structure.1 In his early theoretical
works he was concerned with phenomena relatively near the musical
surface that he would later see as belonging to "lower" levels. The term
"lower," however, is by no means to be taken in a derogatory sense, as
though Schenker were discarding these aspects of music; he merely saw
that they were governed by still higher constructs.
While the chronological development of his theory proceeded from
the low to the high, so to speak, Schenker very often chose the opposite
course-from high to low-when presenting his theory in writing.2 In
his last work, Der freie Satz, the systematic presentation of his complete
theory in its final form, he early introduces the concept of the Ursatz,
the highest structural level and a constant throughout tonal composi145

tion. He then moves "down"-in the direction of the musical surfacetaking up in logical order phenomena of ever finer detail (even giving a
chapter to articulation slurs of the tiniest size!), but always in the light
of that which systematically had preceded them. In this astonishingly
comprehensive presentation, Schenker tried to locate hierarchically all
his specific ideas on musical organization. The subject of this article is
one such idea, and one which, in my opinion, has been slighted in much
of the discussion of Schenker's contribution to musical thought. I refer
to his discovery that, in a given tonal composition, a melodic unit, or
"motive," can be subjected to "hidden repetitions." While these repetitions could take the form of simple rhythmic transformations on the
surface, Schenker was much more interested in those that involved subsurface elements, that is, in which the motive was expressed on different
structural levels-both low and high-or, as is often said, expressed "in
the small" and "the large." I am likewise concerned chiefly with repetitions of this type, and will call such a repetition a "motivic parallelism." But I hasten to add that Schenker used a variety of terms for
the phenomenon, and I will later give an account of them.
Ideas more or less similar to this have been advanced by other 20thcentury writers, notably Rudolph Reti and Josef Rufer.3 A thorough
comparison of their methods and results with Schenker's would require
a separate article. Suffice it to say that, although the work of Reti and
Rufer is quite different, they share one basic feature that distinguishes
their approach to motivic ideas from that of Schenker: both start with
the motive (or theme) and attempt to derive the rest of the composition therefrom. They will point to sub-surface configurations of notes
and claim that, by virtue of a vague resemblance in general shape, these
configurations are organically related, but they feel no need to support
their claims with criteria of a systematic nature. In particular, they
make no attempt to relate melodic phenomena to the domains of harmony and tonal structure. Schenker's starting point is a theory of tonal
structure that accounts for both melody and harmony and the interaction of the two. Because the melodically particular arises from systematically defined constants, he can analyze it in terms of those
constants with consistency and precision. It follows that motivic parallelisms, although considered very important by Schenker, do not occupy
as central a place in his work as they do in that of Reti and Rufer. He
merely says: they sometimes occur; they do not have to occur; when
they do, their significance for the particular work will vary from case to
case, but they always impart to it a greater coherence, a richer content.
Although the existence of motivic parallelism in Schenker is made
possible by his concept of structural levels, the idea is not itself a
systematic construct-like the Ursatz, for example-or a systematic
technique like superposition or voice exchange. Rather, it is more in
146

the nature of a compositional feature-an element of design. For this
reason it cannot be discussed very satisfactorily in the abstract; indeed,
the idea figures much more prominently in Schenker's analyses of individual compositions than in his specifically theoretical writings. I will
later trace the idea in his work and review his single attempt to formulate it in theoretical terms, but first I offer (in Part I) my own presentation of Schenker's idea through a series of examples selected to reveal
various aspects of motivic parallelism and distinguish it from related
phenomena.
PART I
Two quite modest examples will serve to introduce some basic terms
and frequent characteristics. The first, the well-known beginning of
Mozart's C major piano sonata, K. 545, features two statements of the
melodic progression A-G-F-E* as shown under the brackets in Example
la.4 This two-fold statement is an example of motivic parallelism. (In
the interests of basic terms, I will ignore the larger melodic levels of
this excerpt.) Designating the 4-note unit as a "motive" extends the
term beyond its traditional application to surface events only. The
"parallelism" is, strictly speaking, the relation between the first statement and its repetition, but this term can also simply refer to the second statement alone. The second "parallels" the first by traversing
either the same pitches or, as I will presently show, a transposition of
those pitches.
A motivic parallelism must have at least two statements of the
motive, but more may occur. It is sometimes convenient to call the
first the pattern and the second the copy. Additional statements can
also be called copies. A copy may be of any length relative to the pattern. In Example la, the copy, being longer than the pattern, is also
called an enlargement (Vergrosserung is Schenker's term). This term is
not to be equated with augmentation, as of a fugue subject (although
Example la might mislead one to do so since the enlargement here
happens to be exactly twice as long as the pattern). The difference
between enlargement and augmentation is that the former is a motive
that lies embedded among notes of subordinate rank-notes of "embellishment"-while the latter normally has no embellishment, but lies
openly on the surface. By "surface" I mean the "note-to-note" aspect
of music, without thought of hierarchy. A condition of motivic
*In this article I have designatedpitches in two ways. When no registeris involved, I indicatepitches simply as capitalletters standingalone;when the exact

register needs to be indicated, I use the well-known system in which c1 denotes
middle C, c2 the next highest C, etc. Author.
147

Mozart, K. 545, I
Allegro

A enlargement

G

F

E

Example la (after Jonas)

Beethoven, Op. 2, No. 1, III

Menuetlo

Aliegretto

contraction

'b:?-

5
3

tr

64-3

- r

5

-5

r

Yr

Example 1 b(after Schenker)

J. S. Bach, WTC I, Prelude 8

9)

148

b, 1,

cpr1 ,

t

(p ;; (
?

Example 2 (after Schenker)

I

parallelism is that either pattern or copy or both must lie at least partly
beneath the surface-that is, be embellished by additional notes. In
Example la both pattern and copy are thus embellished, although the
pattern only slightly so.
The motive in Example lb (from the Menuetto of Beethoven's F
minor piano sonata, Op. 2, No. 1) is a 5-note turn-A-flat-B-flat-A-flatG-A-flat. Here the pattern-copy situation is the reverse of that in
Example la (and one more rarely encountered): the copy is a contraction (Verkleinerung) of the pattern. The pattern, rather than the copy,
lies beneath the surface in that it is embellished by brief arpeggiations
into an inner voice. This inner voice is indicated by downward stems in
the figure.5
Example lb makes the important point that individual notes of a
motive may have a harmonic function in the copy different from that
which they have in the pattern. Indeed, a parallelism is all the more
interesting when this is the case. For example, the pattern's B-flat, lying
as it does within a prolonged I chord, is a dissonant upper neighbor to
a larger, chordal A-flat, while in the copy the B-flat is a member of a
V7 harmony and the following A-flat a passing tone within a prolongation of that harmony. Example lb also illustrates that pattern and copy
need not be in the same voice, and, further, that they can overlap in
time.
A quite different type of sub-surface repetition is revealed by the
E-flat minor prelude from the first book of Bach's Well-Tempered
Clavier. A reduction of the prelude's opening twelve measures is given
in Example 2.6 The motive of a descending filled-in third runs throughout the work. These filled-in thirds occur in many transpositions, each
one providing a local basis for much more elaborate motivic life on the
surface. But the surface has relatively few filled-in thirds, and those that
do occur there have no very significant motivic connection with the subsurface ones. Among the sub-surface motives, the absence of a clear
pairing of the first two statements makes the terms "pattern" and "copy"
of less relevance here than in Examples 1a and Ib.
This type of motivic parallelism-multiple repetitions, with transposition-is quite common. It is not peculiar to Baroque music, as the
example might suggest. Also, any kind of sub-surface motive-not just
filled-in intervals-can receive such treatment. (See, for example, the
treatment of the broken-triad motive-both on and beneath the surface
-in Mozart's C major sonata, K. 545, second movement, measures 2
through 7.) I mention this type of treatment at this early point because
many of my subsequent examples will be "pattern-copy" pairs with the
copy dramatically enlarged, and I do not wish to leave the impression
that they represent the chief type. There is no chief type.
The beginning of Chopin's F-sharp major nocturne, Op. 15, No. 2,
149

Chopin, Nocturne, Op. 15, No. 2
LarghetJ o

'
a)

~"2??

?J''

[jJl'"JJ=
7

'"?,

b)

?3)

r>

_

i
j4lJiJ
17 -',JeJ9DJJJM,JJ!LJJJJ)jjj]?
lewiero

1_^T

,w

)

""

b

_r

Lr

r

J

Example 3
showing variation, not parallelism

a) normal upper-neighbor
formula

I

II

Ti
tinc.
b) mod ijfied thus:

N

,

(3)

(2)

inc. N

Example 4
150

presents another sort of pattern-copy situation (see Example 3.) The
pattern of measures 1-2 is answered by a copy in measures 3-4 and by
a second, far more elaborate, copy in measures 11-12. This well-known
kind of pattern-copy relationship, however, is not called motivic parallelism but variation.7 There is indeed common ground between the
concepts of variation and parallelism, and it could be argued that they
differ only in degree. But the degree is considerable in that variation
not only includes the element of harmony, but makes both pattern and
copy complete pitch-structural units. There is, moreover, a rhythmic
factor essential to variation: pattern and copy take on the same
rhythmic structure and are basically of the same length. This is a decisive distinction. It is one reason why Example Ib is a parallelism, not
a variation.
The pattern-copy relationship in variation, then, is quite fixed. In
motivic parallelism the relationship is much more fluid and open to an
unlimited variety of structural possibilities. There is one such possibility
that is particularly characteristic of motivic parallelism and impossible
in variation: pattern and copy can "nest" one within the other, thus:
?
f-. That is, the two statements start on the same note
but lie on different levels. (I will be showing this in several later examples.) Variations cannot nest; they are always temporally separate.
Although the concept of variation is excluded from that of parallelism, genuine parallelisms most certainly can exist within a patternstatement or a copy-statement of a variation, or between the two at
non-identical spots, or anywhere between different voices. For example,
in Example 3a, notice the opening a-sharpl-bl-a-sharpl reflected in the
c-sharp'-d-sharp2-c-sharp2 of measure 2-a small but pregnant parallelism, as I will show. And in Example 3b, observe another, and longer,
copy in the left hand's c-sharp-d-natural-c-sharp.
This same Chopin nocturne provides the opportunity to isolate another concept that overlaps with that of motivic parallelism. It is a
structural concept of large scale, but I will approach it from the small.
In the opening four right-hand notes of the nocturne, the particular
form that the neighbor-tone formula takes is not the normal one, but
a derivative of it as shown in Example 4. These four notes initiate
motivic events that are paralleled on a higher level in measures 1-16
as shown in Examples 5a and 5b. I refer not only to 1) the way the bl
of the upbeat is enlarged and given harmonic support with a II chord,
and to 2) how the appoggiatura a-sharp1 of measure 1 is repeated in
the cadential 4 chord at measure 7, but also call attention to 3) the
arpeggiated fifth-g-sharp1 down to c-sharp'-which, first appearing in
measure 1, is intricately prolonged in measures 7-8.
While repeated details such as these are the subject of this article,
this example is special because of its particular relation to repetitions
151

Chopin, Nocturne, Op. 15, No. 2

a) Mm. 1-2

t')u 4

,,

A"V00a#

e

(3)
u

P

b)Mm.1-16

b) Mm. 1-16
3
3

(1)

2#pI
f"*#ti

J

511 1nS~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
,~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
i

Example 5 (after Schenker)

152

of a larger, more general kind: both measures 1-2 and measures 1-16
3-2-i

are based on the melodic-harmonic structure I-V-I (see Examples Sa
and 5b). This structure will be recognized as identical with one of the
three Ursatz forms, and it may come as no surprise that the Ursatz of
3-2-i
the entire composition is also I-V-I.8 Thus the opening portions of the
composition exhibit replications of the structural construct embracing
the whole in the manner of a series of nesting levels, thus:
(

1

This structural construct-I will call it "Ursatz parallelism"-is found in
many compositions. It is a valid construct in its own right, and one that
Schenker placed under the still larger heading of Ubertragung der Ursatzformen, that is, "transference (to lower levels) of the Ursatz forms."
Ursatz parallelism, since it is a structural concept, exceeds the definition of motivic parallelism. It has at times been confused with motivic
parallelism to the detriment, it seems to me, of the latter.9 My objection to mixing up the two is that the "motive" involved-the Urlinie-is
of so universal a nature, and its transference to lower levels so-one might
say-"automatic," that Ursatz parallelism is virtually irrelevant to the
subject of motivic parallelism, which focuses upon the "free" and the
unique rather than the general. In the present example, the relevant
point is that the elaboration of the 3-2-1 of Example 5a is paralleled
in the elaboration of the 3-2-1 of Example 5b. This aspect of the repetition is much more unusual and interesting than the Ursatz parallelism
per se.
This is not at all to say, however, that the Ursatz concept is generally
irrelevant to small motivic events. Obviously they are intimately linked
here. Also, Schenker has described another, even more explicit, relationship that can occur between the two. I will report on this in Part II.
It is well known that when motives are repeated on the surface, their
intervals are frequently altered for harmonic reasons. Similar tonal
alteration sometimes occurs in sub-surface repetitions as well. An example is measures 17-24 of our Chopin nocturne (see Example 6). Although these measures present a contrasting theme on the surface, the
top voice is structured on an enlargement of measure 1 (with upbeat).
The point is not the transposition to the area of C-sharp major (V), but
that, within the large-scale V, the original motive is altered to conform to a lower-rank A-sharp major (III) chord. (Also observe the correspondence between the pattern's repeated C-sharps of measures 1-2
-a salient feature of the original motive-and the strange repeated Asharps of measure 24. If there is any doubt that Example 6b parallels
6a, surely these insistent A-sharps testify to the contrary.)
A second, and very large, example of a tonal copy spans virtually
the first 45 measures of the nocturne. It grows out of the c-sharp2 first
manifested in the surface motive shown in Example 7a. Here the har153

Chopin, Nocturne, Op. 15, No. 2

a)
I

J'r

b)

t

g

~

w

a

...8
appog

~

.

4

____

IJ

5

b)

?
@

?

?

@

-E

--

(1[~3)

Y

X
Y

Example 6
illustrating a tonally altered enlargement

Chopin, Nocturne, Op. 15, No. 2

m. 2 (also 4,10, 12)

MJ

b"Q
/)tB
<tiV

^-

C^

Example 7

154

mony is simply a I chord. Example 7b shows the copy of this motive.
Its intervallic differences are clearly related to the V chord.10 Of course,
a listener can only gradually become aware of so huge a copy as this. At
measure 17 he will be hearing the smaller-scale parallelism shown in
Example 6. But at measure 25 (doppio movimento), the e-sharp2 of
measure 17 is quite audibly picked up again. The g-sharp2 of measures
33-38 stands out clearly, and, at the appoggiatura (d-natural3-c-sharp3)
of 39-41-the climax of the entire piece-the relationship to the appoggiatura (d-sharp2-c-sharp2) of the pattern becomes inescapable.
It is obvious that the more one admits the possibility of divergence
from the exact intervals of the pattern, the riskier the business of finding parallelisms becomes. The most convincing cases are those that span
clearly articulated formal units. I particularly emphasize the point that
the uncovering of divergent copies requires particular attention to the
harmonic milieu. Of course, no motives of any kind can be meaningfully analyzed without a full accounting of their relation to harmonic
elements.
The subject of motivic parallelism impinges in a number of ways on
the traditional concept of motivic transformation, that is, the rhythmic
alteration of a motive. The concept of transformation is distinct from
parallelism (as I have defined it) because in the former both pattern and
copy lie wholly on the surface, while the latter always has a sub-surface
component. Although I have found it necessary to maintain the conceptual distinction, individual cases certainly exist-like Example 8, for
example-that could be called without serious consequences either a
parallelism or a transformation.1
Schenker did not encounter a great deal of motivic transformation
in the music to which he confined himself, but he encountered some.
He includes examples of transformed repetitions in his analysis of
motives without pointing out any distinction between them and subsurface repetitions. Probably he made no such distinction because he
felt the transformations were so obvious. It is noteworthy that one of
his most frequently used terms for motivic parallelism gracefully embraces transformation as well. I refer to verborgene Wiederholungen"hidden repetitions." If the repetition is sub-surface, it is "hidden" by
the lower-rank pitches; if on the surface, it is "hidden" by the altered
rhythm.
Transformation is a prominent stylistic element in much late 19thand early 20th-century music. That parallelism also is present in this
repertoire has been demonstrated by Felix Salzer, in various analyses
in his Structural Hearing12 of works by Wagner, Mahler, and Debussy.
Of particular interest is his reduction (in Volume II, Graph 455) of the
first thirty measures of Debussy's Prelude to "Afternoon of a Faun,"
which shows how the first six pitches of the flute solo in measure 1155

Beethoven,Op.2, No

t.A
011N

first the

pp

1j

r1 I

Example 8

Debussy, Pre'lude'aL'apr'es-

whole-tone setx

Iwhole -tone setyI

Example 9

from c-sharp2 down to g-naturall--appear in several sub-surface enlargements, most notably at measures 21-25. Confining myself to the remainder of this motivically complex work, I offer two further illustrations of parallelisms quite distinct from its many transformations.'3
1) The opening flute solo moves from g-natural' back to c-sharp2;
the same course is traversed in the large from measure 31 to measure
37 as shown in Example 9. As this enlargement slowly proceeds
beneath the surface, rapid transformations (harmonically altered) of
the motive of measure 1 are projected on the surface. (Measures 31
through 36 enclose the work's most radical departure from traditional procedure. Within these measures the primary referent is the
whole-tone set. It is the shift from one transposition of the set (x) to
the other (y) at measure 34 that produces an alteration in the motivic pattern: b-flat' instead of b-naturall.)
2) The first closed section of the work, measures 1-30, features
many repetitions of c-sharp2 as a long appoggiatura yearning for bl.
The transitional section of measures 37-55 is characterized by a
modulation to D-flat major, the key of the second closed section
(measures 55-74). Here, in the service of "neutralizing" the appoggiatura c-sharp2 by turning it into a tonic, a three-note motive,
b'-c2-d-flat2, is projected on several levels (see Example 10, which
shows only this element). I relate this motive to the upbeat of the
main theme of the work, that is, to the b'-b-sharp'-c-sharp2 at the
turn of measure 2, of measure 21, etc., and likewise at the turn of
measure 37, where the last C-sharp appoggiatura occurs until the
"reprise" at measure 94.
While motivic parallelisms are chiefly found in upper voices, statements of pattern, copy, or both can appear in the bass also. Since the
bass must, of course, simultaneously continue its main task of providing the harmonic structure, such an event can produce a rich fusion of
melodic and harmonic elements. In Brahms's A minor intermezzo, Op.
76, No. 7, an eight-measure introduction closes with a V-I cadence
whose two bass notes, E-A, receive an unusual embellishment-E-C-Athat is subsequently reflected in the chief motive of the main body of
the piece (see Example 11).
A remarkably extended example of bass parallelism occurs in
Schubert's "Erlkonig."'4 The famous left-hand motive announced in
measure 2 is first of all a rapid motion up to inner-voice d and back
down, the bass voice being simply G. At the peak of this motion the d
is embellished with an upper neighbor tone e-flat. This motive not only
figures notably on the surface, but also appears as an enormous enlargement spanning virtually the entire song (see Example 12). Schubert
stretches out the motive by treating several of its tones as temporary
157

_I.~~~~~~~~~~Debussy,

Prelude a L'apres-

0o
00

Example 10

Brahms, Intermezzo, Op. 76,

E1 'j1 C^.-LT
^G

3

V4lH='^

x

LLLI

Example
11I

Example 11

appog.
J

tonics. But it must be recognized that he did not make of this inspired
idea a mechanical tour de force. For one thing, the motive's second
note, A, is omitted in the enlargement, since it would be virtually impossible to elevate this note to the status of a tonic within the song's
basically quite conventional "key plan." The same is true of the motive's
penultimate note, B-flat, which is likewise omitted. (It is very questionable to find this note paralleled in the B-flat of the I6 chord in measure 129.) Still, Schubert has paralleled quite enough of the motive to
leave no doubt of the idea-an idea whose relation to the mounting excitement of the poem is obvious. Particularly interesting is the way the
neighbor tone E-flat is worked into the plan: the rising keys, B-flat
major, C major, and D minor, are exactly synchronized with the three
increasingly insistent speeches of the Erlking. Each of these keys clearly
demarcates a closed musical section, and each of these sections is preceded by a "transitional," modulating section. When D minor is reached
(measure 112), the Erlking's third speech, instead of starting at once, is
delayed until the sudden entrance of an E-flat major chord, which is
not a key, but only the flat-II of a I-flat-II-V-I progression in the prevailing key of D minor. While Schubert scarcely tonicizes the E-flat,
his paralleling of the motive is all the closer for that, because, just
as the E-flat of the motive belongs to the note D, so this flat-II belongs to D minor. Of course, we have to overlook the A major chord
of measure 122-the chord the flat-II must progress to on the way to
the cadential I.
My two final examples show pattern and copy effecting cohesion
between the exposition and development sections of sonata forms. Also,
I will show how each of these examples lies under the Ursatz-a dimension omitted from most of the earlier examples.
In an essay (in Tonwille II, p. 25) on Beethoven's F minor piano
sonata, Op. 2, No. 1, Schenker, discussing the first movement, reports
the remarkable discovery that a sub-surface motive spanning the first
theme (measures 1-8) is paralleled in a huge enlargement (measures 4981) in the development section. The motive is in two parts-first a rising
third (A-flat-B-flat-C), then a falling sixth (C-B-flat-A-flat-G-F-Enatural). (See Example 13a, which represents only the exposition.)
Schenker published this essay in 1922, before his theory of the Ursatz
had reached its final form. I have couched Example 13 in terms of the
mature theory, placing the entire parallelism-pattern and copy tog-4- -2
gether-under the still large construct:
I IIV Example 13a shows
that, in the first theme, the falling sixth (measures 7-8) is bounded by
c3 (as 5) and inner-voice e-natural2. In the bridge section (measures 920), the falling sixth is repeated in A-flat major (e-flat2-g ), bringing in
its course b-flatI as 4. The second theme (measures 21-41) contains
many attempts to resolve G to A-flat, but does not fully do so until the
159

Schube
0o
Motive

:

r
L
mm.

I

J

-r

-

,

I

)

(m)

lo
^>;b *..

I'

I

3

I

I

'Narrator

I
i

Im .

t"'Duliebes'
Kind"

trans.
_________

r
m

I

'"WilJst feiner'
Knobe"

I

, tra
tra ins

'ulch

liebe
4

C
rr'r
,~ fK

rans.
r ns.

'I

dich"

Y

'

I

Example 12

Beethoven, Op. 2, No.
1st theme

bridge

A

Motive:

^

I

r1

3^ i-i

'''--i

Example

i

Z,

j

-l0r^^^,^,11'
1 3a(after

Scher)

Exml
Example 13a (after Schenker)

movement's first full cadence-at measure 41-which brings a-flat as 3
over an A-flat major chord (III of the Ursatz). The closing theme (measures 41-48), with its "turn motive" discussed earlier (Example 8),
now prolongs the 3.
Example 13b represents the development section. Its seven stages,
3 2
starting with the Ursatz progression III V, move progressively nearer
to the composition. The enlarged motive begins on A-flat as 3 and
soars over the many references to the surface motives of the exposition.
It ends at measure 81 with the arrival of the V of the Ursatz. The G of
this V chord is the Urlinie's 2. But because the motive descends to innervoice e-naturall, the 2 is not present in the foreground.
Except for a few brief references to it in Harmonielehre, the first
movement of Mozart's C major piano sonata, K. 330, is not analyzed
in the published works of Schenker. The motivic parallelisms in this
movement are of particular interest because of their relation to an
unusual aspect of the design, namely, that the exposition's surface
themes are absent from the development section. I will show that the
integration of exposition and development is achieved by means of
motivic parallelisms. But before doing so, I must draw attention to another unusual feature: the first and second themes are themselves a
parallelism. The single construct underlying both themes is a compound
of three motives that I will identify as t (for triad), x, and y. This construct (txy) may be schematized as in Example 14a. Motives t, x, and y
all start on and are prolongations of a high-rank 5.
t is the descending triad 5-3-1, lies near the surface and is therefore
short. It is embellished with appoggiaturas.
x is the upper-neighbor motion 5-6-5, lies below the surface and is
of long duration.
y is a passing motion down to lower-rank 3.
Example 14b shows these motives as they appear in the first and
second themes. Notice that the second theme can be broadly viewed in
terms of two xy 's-a low-rank one nesting within a higher one as shown
in Example 14c. The higher xy is in turn superseded by the Urlinie (51) of the G major section, and over all this reigns a still higher-rank d2
-the 2 of the Urlinie. (The complete Urlinie cannot be taken up here.)
The dispersal of the motives in the development section is highlighted by Examples 14d and 14e. First of all, notice in Example 14d
that txy-in still another metamorphosis-is discernible in the first
phrase (measures 59-66). Motive t is here greatly lengthened are reduced to just the descending fifth (d2-gl), with the typical appoggiaturas abundant in the figuration. Arching over the whole phrase is a
high-rank x that joins with a surface y, just as in the exposition.
Motives y and xy are then further developed in measures 65-79 (see
161

Beethoven, Op. 2, No. 1, I, Development
A

A

3

0 I.

2

1)

nr

uI

Y

-

15

[^
5)

" "
*

-

-.

4) ,.J

"-*

15

C

i

-6

O

-

-

,--' ..

.

^

^^

_

--

rr

.

r

6)

etc.

3

(2)
- - -

"

en lrgemenr

i.
_ _, ^ ,:
--,,

i_

-

-

_

-.

-

7)

6 - (5) 6-(5)

6

"-6 (Er

n5-

162

:_

_ -

Example 13b

v

x
N

6

5

(5)

(\ 4
third -.-.3

3
I

-

t

y

I

(for t ri cd )
Example 14a

Mozart, K. 330, I (second theme)

Example 14c

163

Mozart, K. 330, I
first theme (beginning)

T

1

P
A i' XiI

1 1

v*4-3

second theme (entire)
A

G moj.
T -

x

I!

Im

_

n_

-

-I

QL^yl"fl"jtW

^
3

2

1

y----II
(1z)

164

y

.6

I

Example 14b

Mozart, K. 330, I, Development

xy

~
~

(res-f

L~-~.
et...
I

"

Example 14d
165

m!E ,,@S

7r-

Mozart, K. 330, I, Development
(showing the enlargement of motive y)

?
y

1)

2)

1

i~

I

4

r

, , --ad

',
j~

W-"d

A

-4 j

~

QI-J
0

3)

E

a f":iR;
0*'

L

-F ---

. _-

r~

Example 14e
166

/

r

(l
l-s,

-

- 1b-

4.

-

7
n

Example 14e and compare with Example 14d): y (as d2-c2-b') receives
a most imaginative enlargement;'5 while this enlarged y slowly unfolds
beneath the surface, contractions of xy-now brought entirely to the
surface-are stated in several transpositions.
The first movement of K. 330, then, is-in a subsurface sense-a
"monothematic" sonata form. But the very different rhythms of the
two presentations of txy, not to mention the different figuration, create
a surface impression of two distinct themes, as in a normal sonata form.
Neither of these surface themes appears as such in the development, as
earlier noted, and this is abnormal, to say the least. But much development nevertheless occurs-and in two basic ways: sub-surface elements
are either repeated sub-surface (with new rhythm and figuration), or are
exposed on the surface in contracted form.
I do not wish to leave the impression that many sonatas (by Mozart
or anyone else) are similarly monothematic beneath the surface. I do
not believe this to be the case. I also give very little weight to the fact
that Mozart used txy-or something quite close to it-as the basis of the
opening theme of more than one composition. The important thing is
the way such compositions differ, and, still more important, the artistic
content of each individual case.
A brief resume of the foregoing examples will show that they exhibit a diversity of structural characteristics. In some, the motivic statements nest one within the other: --i
'; in others, they are temr -. In the former, the two statements are
porally separate: j
necessarily on different levels, but in the latter, statements can be on
the same or on different levels. The examples also exhibit a variety of
designs in the motives themselves. In general, the simpler a design is, the
more it tends to appear in many pieces (although there are a fair number of designs that I know only one example of). Perhaps the most
frequent are the filled-in third, the turn, and, especially, the upper
neighbor-tone formula. Another frequently found one is, like the
Mozart example just discussed, that which starts with the upper neighbor tone, then continues to fall in steps; e.g., 5-6-5-4-3.
The examples also demonstrate that the Schenkerian motivic parallelism is indissolubly wedded to the harmony of the passage in which it
occurs. This could hardly be otherwise in a theory that sees melody and
harmony as emanations of a single source-the tonic triad-and therefore ultimately inseparable. But it is not true that parallelisms are an
automatic by-product of the triadic tonal system or-more to the point
-that they are an automatic by-product of a theory that sees musical
structure in terms of levels. Although parallelisms can be isolated thanks
only to the theory of levels, they are not an inevitable manifestation
of that theory. Rather, they are a manifestation of the composer's freedom, and the most interesting parallelisms are manifested in the works
of the best composers.
167

Since Schenker's theory views all detail in the light of something
larger, I have occasionally found it problematic to write this article from
the opposite point of view, that is, beginning with the small. Therefore I
will, in the course of briefly tracing the development of motivic parallelism in Schenker's work, summarize the one extended statement on
the subject that he made from the perspective of his complete system.
PART II
The Term "Motivischer Parallelismus" in Schenker
Although Schenker's work provides abundant examples of motivic
parallelisms as well as lengthy discussion of many specific cases, he did
not often use the term "motivischer Parallelismus," and when he did,
it was frequently not in the sense that I have used "motivic parallelism"
here. On those rare occasions when he used it, Schenker was generally
referring to quite simple exact repetitions in which both pattern and
copy lay entirely on the surface. Usually the copy would be transposed;
sometimes it would be rhythmically different.
The earliest instance of the term "motivischer Parallelismus" that I
know of is in Paragraph 79 of the Harmonielehre. Speaking of a musical
example (No. 156), Schenker points out that pattern and copy have a
formal correspondence. Such a correspondence can likewise be observed in several other (although not all) instances of the term in later
writings. For example, in Tonwille VI, page 11, Schenker, discussing
Beethoven's fifth symphony, third movement, refers to an 8-measure
phrase (mm. 19-26) and its exact transposition a minor third higher
(mm. 27-34) as a "motivischer Parallelismus." It is worth noting that
this usage is quite precise in that it applies to musical statements that
are very nearly identical. In several later instances (e.g., Tonwille VII,
p. 5; Meisterwerk I, p. 68; Meisterwerk III, p. 50; and Der freie Satz,
Paragraph 252 at Figure 118), Schenker does use the term (or simply
"Parallelismus," or "parallelistisch") in reference to sub-surface examples. But since he also retains the earlier usage in late writings, one
cannot conclude that the meaning of the term was gradually becoming
more limited and specific, as, for example, in the case of the term
Urlinie.
What did Schenker call the phenomenon that is the subject of this
article? He used various terms. Very often he simply used "Motiv,"
a term he would apply to motivic life on any level, whether a parallelism (in my sense) was present or not. Or, similarly, he would use
"motivischer Inhalt" (motivic content) or simply "der Inhalt." Often he
would merely point out the "Vergr6sserung" (enlargement) or the
"Verkleinerung" (contraction). Or he might picturesquely refer to
pattern and copy as "Aussaat" and "Ernte" (seed and harvest). In the
168

particularly striking case in Beethoven's Op. 2, No. 1 (recall Examples
13a and 13b) he used a word of his own, "Urmal," meaning "basic
mark," that is, most significant feature. Throughout his work the term
"verborgene Wiederholungen" (hidden repetitions) appears, and it is
this one that Schenker quite definitely prefers in Der freie Satz.
Since Schenker always treated motivic matters within their context,
it was natural that he used various terms, depending on the situation.
I needed one term to designate my subject, and chose "motivic parallelism" because it is generally so used today.
The Growth of the Idea of Motivic Parallelism in
Schenker's Writings
In Schenker's earlier theoretical works, the Harmonielehre (1906)
and the two-volume Kontrapunkt (1910 and 1922), as well as in his
analytic works up to about 1920, the concept of structural levels is not
sufficiently developed to permit motivic parallelisms to appear in any
very significant way. However, in Harmonielehre Schenker enunciated
a basic esthetic principle relevant to them. "Repetition," he writes, "is
the basis of music
tion of content is
on a considerably
series of tones . .

as an art . . . An especially rich source for the creato be found in repetition . . .From (it) there arisesmotif . . . The motif is a recurring
higher level-the
. Only repetition can demarcate a series of tones and

its purpose."16 Schenker considered the principle of repetition so fundamental to music that in later writings he referred numerous times to the
passages here quoted, sometimes in specific connection with examples
of parallelism. The term he used in Der freie Satz to denote parallelisms,
"verborgene Wiederholungen," likewise maintains a connection with
this early statement.
Publication of the annotated editions of four late piano sonatas of
Beethoven was begun in 1913. The last of these, issued in 1920, was of
the A major sonata, Op. 101, and represents a point in the development of the concept of levels where a special notation was needed to
portray it. This can be seen in various of the sketches. The essay's
Figure No. 38 is of particular interest as an early example of motivic
parallelism in Schenker's work. Taking the form of five stages, it
demonstrates an astonishing relation between the 20-measure Adagio
section and the melody of the first movement's opening two measures.
(Immediately following the Adagio, Beethoven is going to quote
exactly these two measures. To prepare for this unexpected event, he
subtly foreshadows it in the Adagio.)
The ten Tonwille and three Meisterwerk volumes, published between 1921 and 1930, are in large part analyses of specific compositions. These are in the form of essays consisting of text plus musical
reductions, both of which must be simultaneously followed by a reader
169

already intimately familiar with the composition as music. As Schenker's
theory deepened, these essays gradually took on a format that became
standard: typically, they start with a presentation of the ultimate background, then-gradually building the piece before the reader's eyes, as it
were-work systematically "down" through a series of progressively
more elaborate stages that reveal motivic and other voice-leading events
of ever smaller scope, and conclude with remarks on how the piece
should be performed. (Appendices on (1) text criticism and (2) the
work of earlier analysts of the piece are often added to the larger
essays.) Although these are analyses, not primarily presentations of a
theory (like Der freie Satz-and the distinction is important), they
nevertheless display a continual growth in Schenker's concepts together
with an ever more refined notation for visually representing them.
Motivic parallelism is one aspect of this remarkable growth. A multitude
of examples are contained in these essays, many singled out in the
reductions by means of brackets, others simply mentioned in the text.
In one of these essays (Die Kunst der Improvisation, Meisterwerk I,
p. 11), Schenker makes a particularly valuable point that touches on
a relation sometimes found between motivic parallelism and the Urlinie. Analyzing the prelude to Handel's D minor suite for clavier, he
presents (on pages 37-38) two possible readings of the Urlinie of this
piece and states that Reading 1 is superior to Reading 2 because it
reflects "a motivic connection between the path of the Urlinie and the
diminution of the lowest rank" (my translation). Specifically, the
referred-to "diminution" (a term I will discuss presently) is the subsurface motive A-B-flat-A-G-F, which, within the opening seven measures, appears several times in various registers and in contexts that
clearly make a neighbor tone of the B-flat. To arrive at a reading of the
Urlinie, an analytic decision must be made within the note series
Schenker's two possible-and both quite
A-G-A-B-flat-A-G-F-E-D.
logical-readings are shown in my Example 15. He is quite emphatic
that the first reading must be chosen over the second because of its
resemblance to surface motives "of the lowest order"-a line of reasoning suggesting that even the Urlinie is to some degree subject to artistic
interpretation. It would be a mistake to conclude that he meant that
this kind of relationship occurs in all pieces. But it occurs in some, and
the analyst should be open to the possibility.
Schenker's continually developing theory reaches its final embodiment within his concept of the Ursatz as formulated in Der freie Satz.
While he obviously could not go back and "correct" all his earlier
analyses in the light of the Ursatz concept, he does give in Der freie
Satz a few different readings of compositions he had treated in earlier
publications. These are of great interest, but they also have had the unfortunate side-effect of encouraging the notion that all the earlier
170

.A
5

Reoding I

t

~b

JI*;
&
5

AA
6
l

d

5

I
r
A

Reoding 1
2 ,
Readin4

W

A
3

A

A

2

1

I
.
C

6

A
3

d
c
A

2

J

6

A
1

Example 15 (adapted from Schenker)

171

analyses are of little value. Such a conclusion is quite unwarranted,
particularly so with respect to the examples of motivic parallelism, most
of which are on sufficiently low levels as to remain substantially unaffected. The Ursatz iconcept will sometimes cast new light upon these
examples, but for the most part it does not threaten their validity or in
any way diminish their importance.
Since motivic parallelism is, as I have said, more in the nature of a
design element than a systematic technique, it is much more readily
discussed in terms of concrete examples than as a theoretical formulation. But in Paragraph 254 of Der freie Satz (1935), Schenker does attempt to arrive at such a formulation, and to place it within his system.
To achieve this, he has recourse to his idea of diminution, an idea that
runs throughout his later writings and to which he devotes an entire
chapter in Der freie Satz. Completely accepting the traditional meaning
of this ancient term, Schenker extends it to apply to a far wider field
than heretofore. "Diminution" is to be understood not only as surface
figuration, but as a process that occurs at every level. Any pitch construct, no matter how comprehensive, can be subjected to diminution.
The triad, the foundation of tonal music, is diminuted-first by means
of arpeggiation, then by connecting its members with passing tones.
Out of this material is formed the Ursatz, the particular "diminution"
of the triad that is the basis of all individual compositions. Diminution
of the Ursatz generates in turn the "first structural level (Schicht)" of a
particular composition; likewise this the second, and so on. This process
of deriving the subsequent from the prior was frequently characterized
by Schenker as "organic" (organisch). In a master composition, a given
detail is not merely pinned on like a sequin, but "organically" derived
from the whole through diminution. However, such membership in a
whole, although essential, is still only a very general condition. More
specific methods are needed to promote further organic relatedness.
These methods are so legion, says Schenker, that he can mention only a
few of the most important. One of them is the time-honored method of
repetition. That is, a higher degree of organic coherence is achieved
when two or more diminutions are the same shape, such as, for example, the dux and comes of a canonic imitation. Such surface repetition
is effortlessly apprehended and gives instant pleasure. But repetitions of
a different sort, less immediately gratifying, but no less genuine and
audible, lie concealed beneath the musical surface. These "hidden repetitions" can range from the tiniest particles to the broadest of tonal
spans. When they appear in a composition they give it a more deeply
"organic" dimension.
Schenker then illustrates this formulation with a large and varied
collection of examples that exhibit enlargement or contraction, or that
lie, as he says, outside such concepts. This collection-Figures 118 and,
172

especially, 119 of the Anhang to Der freie Satz-leaves no doubt that,
whatever his term for it, Schenker is here showing what I have been
calling motivic parallelism. But now he completely eschews the word
"Motiv" because, I suspect, it is too "compositional" for so abstract a
presentation of the idea. His almost poetic "hidden repetitions," on the
other hand, is quite felicitous-unspecific enough to admit every possibility.
Near the close of Paragraph 254 Schenker makes a large claim for
hidden repetitions. They are, he says, "the principal conveyors of the
synthesis ... (The) masters base their syntheses chiefly on such relationships." Whether or not we can take this statement entirely literally (for
there are surely other such "conveyors"), the important word here is
"synthesis." A word Schenker used far more often than "analysis," it
places the emphasis on the putting together rather than the taking
apart.
Regrettably, students exposed to Schenker's theories rarely realize
that, in working with them, "synthesis" is the desired goal. Perhaps
diverted by a premature or sensational presentation of the concept of
the Ursatz, they tend to see Schenker's approach to music only in terms
of reduction, and take the uncovering of the Ursatz as the end of the
quest. Exactly the opposite is the case. The Ursatz is the beginning, not
the end-the starting point of a process of diminution that gradually
yields a systematic view of the whole. The end is this view, that is, the
view from the background toward the foreground-not the other way
round. In short, the end is synthesis.
Hidden repetitions, says Schenker, make an important contribution
to the synthetic view. But, as always, he does not stop with a merely
intellectual "view." Awareness of these repetitions, he adds, contributes
to the quality of performance. When the performer is conscious of
them-hears them in terms of the synthesis-they can make a great difference to the way he plays the music. I have noted that Schenker
usually ended his analytic essays with remarks on how the work in
question should be played. Similarly, he ends this statement urging the
reader to let theory inform practice. For him, the ultimate goal of the
study of motivic parallelisms-as of every aspect of music-is reached
only in its application to the greater task of bringing the music to life.

173

NOTES
1. This development is described by Allen Forte in his classic article, "Schenker's
Conception of Musical Structure" Journal of Music Theory, III/l, (1959).
Forte points out that "Schenker's major concept is not that of the Ursatz,
as is sometimes maintained, but that of structural levels, a far more inclusive
idea."
2. I refer principally to 1) the ten volumes of Der Tonwille (hereafter Tonwille
I-X), privately issued by Schenker between 1921 and 1924, 2) the three
volumes of Das Meisterwerk in der Musik (hereafter Meisterwerk I-III), published by Drei Masken Verlag, Munich, in 1925, 1926, and 1930 respectively
(reissued as three volumes in one in slightly reduced facsimile by Georg Olms,
Hildesheim, 1974), and 3) Der freie Satz (Universal Edition: Vienna, 1935;)
second, revised edition by Oswald Jonas, 1956).
3. See Reti, Rudolph, The Thematic Process in Music (New York: Macmillan,
1951) and Rufer, Josef, Composition with Twelve Notes, translated by H.
Searle (London: Barrie and Rockliff, 1954). Reti attempts to demonstrate
melodic connections between various themes within given movements and
likewise between themes of different movements of given works. Rufer, who
was, of course, primarily writing about 12-tone music, elaborates upon
Schoenberg's idea of the Grundgestalt ("basic shape"). According to Rufer,
Schoenberg spoke of this idea in reference to both tonal and 12-tone music,
but did not demonstrate it in detail. Rufer defines the idea as "the musical
shape (or phrase) which is the basis of a work and is its 'first creative thought'
(to use Schoenberg's words) . . . Everything else is derived from this. . ." (p.
viii). He offers an extensive demonstration of the idea (p. 183) in an analysis
of a Beethoven sonata movement.
4. Oswald Jonas first pointed- out this parallelism in his Einfuhrung in die Lehre
Heinrich Schenkers (Vienna: Universal Edition, 1934, rev. ed., 1972), an insightful presentation of Schenker's theory. (Throughout my article, some of
the examples will come from Schenker himself, some from others. Both
types will be credited. Uncredited examples are by the author.)
5. Example lb is adapted from Schenker's Tonwille II, p. 32. Schenker also
gives precise directions on how the performer should bring out this parallelism.
6. Example 2 is adapted from a sketch in Schenker's Tonwille I, p. 38.
7. I am elaborating here on a distinction made by Schenker, who illustrates it
with .an extremely detailed analysis of these same measures from Chopin
(Der freie Satz, Paragraph 252, Figure 117, 1). It is often said that Schenker
viewed all composition as essentially a "variation" process. While this is in a
very general sense true, such a use of the word "variation" is far broader than
the strict (and quite traditional) sense in which I am using it here.
8. As Schenker has shown in an illuminating sketch of the complete piece
found in Meisterwerk II, p. 41, in which he also analyzes the "neighbor-tone
diminution" in great detail (see especially the enormous C-sharp-D-naturalC-sharp in the bass that undergirds the entire Doppio movimento section!).
9. E.g., Forte, op. cit., p. 10.
10. Schenker, in the analysis cited in Footnote 8, reads the c-sharp2 of mm. 2, 4,
etc., as a covering-tone (Deckton). This covering-tone, within mm. 17-48
(which includes the Doppio movimento section), is greatly elaborated in a long
upward motion to c-sharp3, then down to c-sharpl. (My view of the nocturne is essentially the same as Schenker's, but the motivic analysis given in
Figures 4, 5,6, and 7 is mine.)
11. I am indebted to the late Ernst Oster for pointing out the motivic relation174

12.
13.
14.
15.
16.

ship shown in Figure 8, and, in general, for many invaluable ideas pertaining to my subject. That Beethoven intended this, the closing theme, to be
be heard as a repetition of the turn at the beginning is confirmed by a detail
not shown in Figure 8: the short appoggiaturas in measures 5, 6, 41f., and
144.
Published by Charles Boni, New York, 1952. Republished by Dover Publications, Inc., New York, 1962.
A piano transcription with numbered measures is given in Burkhart, Anthology for Musical Analysis (New York, all editions).
An edition with numbered measures is given in Burkhart, op. cit.
This enlarged y is from an unpublished analysis of Ernst Oster.
The quoted passages are from Paragraph 4 and the note to Paragraph 88 of
Harmony, edited by Oswald Jonas, translated by Elisabeth Mann Borgese
(Chicago, 1954). In the context of the esthetic debate between the "heteronomists" and "autonomists," these passages clearly align Schenker with the
latter. Although he was not primarily an esthetician, his work powerfully
contributes to the view of music as a self-sufficient art.

175

