Yale University Department of Music

Modal Identity and Irregular Endings in Two Chorale Harmonizations by J. S. Bach
Author(s): Lori Burns
Source: Journal of Music Theory, Vol. 38, No. 1 (Spring, 1994), pp. 43-77
Published by: Duke University Press on behalf of the Yale University Department of Music
Stable URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/843827
Accessed: 16/12/2009 07:44
Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of JSTOR's Terms and Conditions of Use, available at
http://www.jstor.org/page/info/about/policies/terms.jsp. JSTOR's Terms and Conditions of Use provides, in part, that unless
you have obtained prior permission, you may not download an entire issue of a journal or multiple copies of articles, and you
may use content in the JSTOR archive only for your personal, non-commercial use.
Please contact the publisher regarding any further use of this work. Publisher contact information may be obtained at
http://www.jstor.org/action/showPublisher?publisherCode=duke.
Each copy of any part of a JSTOR transmission must contain the same copyright notice that appears on the screen or printed
page of such transmission.
JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide range of
content in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and facilitate new forms
of scholarship. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.

Duke University Press and Yale University Department of Music are collaborating with JSTOR to digitize,
preserve and extend access to Journal of Music Theory.

http://www.jstor.org

MODAL IDEN'I'I''Y AND IRREGULAR
ENDINGS IN TWO CHORALE
HARMONIZATIONS BY J. S. BACH*

Lori Burns

An interesting theoretical problem for chorale harmonization is
posed by received cantus firmi that close on pitches other than the
modal final. A common irregularmelodic ending is on the confinal or
"dominant."' Such confinal endings generate unusual harmonic settings, the larger harmonic movement being that of tonic to dominant.
In the works of J. S. Bach, a confinal ending has interestingmodal and
tonal implications when the chorale concludes a larger work. This
study considers two examples of irregularendings in Bach's chorale
repertoire, his settings of the cantus firmi "Christ, unser Herr, zum
Jordan kam" (the final chorale of Cantata 176) and "Durch Adams
Fall ist ganz verderbt" (the final chorale of Cantata 18.)
The paper is organized in two parts. Part I introduces the cantus
firmi in question and surveys pertinent historical writings on the sub*Parts of this paper were read at the Fifth Annual Meeting of the New England
Conference of Music Theorists, held at the Hartt School of Music on March 31,
1990.

43

ject of irregularendings. Part II provides detailed analyses of the two
chorales, using Schenkerian analytical techniques to focus on their
modal organization. The analyticalscope also includes the textual and
tonal organization of the cantatas to which the chorales belong.
Part I: IrregularEndings
The cantus firmi of Bach's chorales "Christ, unser Herr, zum Jordan kam," BWV 176/6 and "Durch Adams Fall ist ganz verderbt,"
BWV 18/5 are reproduced in Examples la and b.2 Their melodic and
cadential organization suggests a Dorian final until the concluding
phrase, which turns toward A. Throughout both melodies, the thematic and inherent harmonic relationships focus primarily on the
modal tension between D and A.
In "Christ, unser Herr," the first phrase rises from D4 to its upper
fifth A4, and then cadences on A4 approached by its upper third C5
in a descending third-progression(C-B-A). The second phrases returns to C5, but this time makes a complete descent to the initial D4.
After a cadence on A4 in phrase 3, the fourth phrase returns to the
upper register, introducingD5, which descends graduallyto cadence
on A4 once again. The fifth phrase appears to repeat the descending
progressionfrom C5 that was heard in phrase 2, but this time stops on
E4 rather than D4. The sixth phrase answers the gesture by prolonging and firmly cadencing on the expected D4. Phrase 6 also makes a
motivic connection to the earlier phrase 4 (indicated by the square
brackets), imitating phrase 4 in such fashion that a cadence on A (m.
12) is answered by a cadence on D (m. 16). The melodic material of
phrase 4 recurs, somewhat altered, in the final phrase; A thereby returns, superseding the sense of D-closure in mm. 15-16.
The melody "Durch Adams Fall" presents a similar tension between D and A. The first phrase spans the fifth from A4 to D4, approaching D at the cadence through a descending third-progression
(F-E-D). The second phrase returns to the upper register A4 and
elaborates it through its upper third, descending in a third-progression
from C5 to A4 at the cadence. Phrase 3 picks up the C5 and spans the
fifth from C to F; the cadence on F4 at m. 6 is also approached by a
descending third-progression(A-G-F). The cadences in mm. 2, 4,
and 6 share the motivic descending third-progressionin quarter-note
motion. The cadence on F mediates the cadences on D and A that
have already been heard, composing out the D-minor triad, D-A-F.
The fourth phrase articulatesa clear descending fifth-progressionfrom
the upper fifth A4 to D4 at the cadence, returningto the fifth-spanof
the first phrase, but avoiding the motivic quarter-note descending
44

Phrase2

Phrase I

Phrase 1 repeated

Phrase2 repeated

PhaIeL

Phas 3

Phrase 3

Phrase 4

JI

vJ

I J J

J44

Phrase5

13

4J

I

II
Phrase7

Phrase6

Example la: Christ, unser Herz, zum Jordan kam
Phrase 1

Phrase2

-. J1 J i J J J | L _J . ,
Phrase3

v

'Phrase5

X\
l

J

1i

Phrase4

.

J
jJ
tJII 4 IJ^
Phrase6

gm
vtCt

tILU

dd

Example lb: Durch Adams Fall ist ganz verderbt
third-progressioninto the cadential pitch. This cadence prolongs instead the second degree above the cadence (E4) as a half note, the
longest note value yet heard in the melody. The fifth phrase reintroduces the upper register A4 and cadences on G4 in a descending
fourth-progressionfrom C5. This phrase acts as a bridge to the final
45

phrase; its descending fourth-progressionapproach to the cadence on
G is not motivically connected to the earlier phrases. The final phrase
picks up on some motivic elements of earlier phrases. It begins on the
upper register D5, repeating the highest pitch heard earlier in phrase
2. Here the phrase actuallybegins on this high note, then exceeds it by
its upper neighbor E5, and graduallydescends from E5 to cadence on
A4. The cadential A4 is approached by its second degree B4 which is
prolonged as a half note in a manner that is comparable to the cadential prolongation of E4 in m. 8.
In both melodies, the thematic conflict between D and A is enhanced by the registralpresentation of cadences on those pitches. The
cadences on A are consistently heard in the upper register (A4), while
the cadences on D are heard a fifth below on D4. And the cadences
on D4 are approached in stepwise descent from A4, seeming to resolve the upper fifth to its root. The final cadences on A4 suggest a
possible continuation or resolution down to D4, a continuation that is
not realized.
Certain seventeenth- and eighteenth-century theorists discuss the
two cantus firmi in question and catalogue the melodies according
to mode. For example, Johann Andreas Herbst, in Musica poetica
(1643), discusses them in the context of melodic endings. He first asks
the question: How manyfold is the final? He answers that it is
twofold-regular (Regularis) and irregular (Irregularis). He defines
regular as "when the melody closes in the correct and natural place
(Clave) of the mode, namely in Clausulaprincipali," and irregularas
"when the voices do not close in their naturalplace (Clave), but rather
in another Clausula, namely Minus principali." He cites as examples
the melodies "Christ, unser Herr, zum Jordan kam" and "Durch
Adams Fall," whose endings are irregular because they close in A
when they should close in D3.
Johann Gottfried Walther, in his Praeceptader musikalischenComponisten (1708), lists both tunes as examples of Dorian-mode chorale
melodies, .but he does not explicitly identify their irregular endings (Walther 1708, 171). Johann Philipp Kirnberger(1776) also cites
these cantus firmi as Dorian melodies, further classifying "Durch
Adams Fall" as a Dorian melody that closes on the fifth degree, and
offering a harmonic solution which I shall consider presently (Kirnberger [1776] 1982, 330). In Herbst's and Kirnberger'sinterpretations,
therefore, as well as-implicitly-in Walther's classification of these
melodies, it is appropriate to consider the chorales in question as
Dorian, ending on the confinal or dominant.4 I have not found any
references to these melodies as examples of the Aeolian mode.
If these chorales are in the Dorian mode, ending on the confinal,
then one must give thought to the interpretations of such irregular
46

closes in modal harmony. How does a structural progression from
final to confinal function within a modal composition? Does such
movement confuse modal identity? How does a confinal ending affect
compositional finality?To consider these questions, I shall begin with
a brief excursion into earlier modal theory, and then review pertinent
seventeenth- and eighteenth-century views on modal harmonic closure.
There are numerous discussions of irregularendings by theorists in
the Renaissance and early Baroque. They make it clear that sixteenthcentury views on the subject of modal closure do not correspond with
modern expectations concerning tonal closure. Bernhard Meier expresses this sentiment in the following remark taken from his extensive study Die Tonartender klassischen Vokalpolyphonie:
. . there exist in sixteenth-century
musicworksthe last tone of which
is not identical with the final of their mode. The assertion just
articulated-and the furtherstatementthat endingsof this sort are not
so rare-may at firstseem ratherdaring, not to say monstrous.Conceded, such endings-as something to which nothing similar exists
in the more recent music familiarto us-impress us as particularly
strange. But sixteenth-centurymusic theory mentions them often
enough, and if we use the clues given to us there, we can again recognize them withoutdifficulty.5
Indeed there is ample evidence that the closing tone of a composition was not necessarily equated with the final of the mode. Zarlino
discusses modal closure in a chapter of Le Istitutioneharmoniche 4
(1558), entitled "Whatthe Composer Should Observe When Composing, and How the Modes Should be Judged" (Zarlino [1558] 1983, 8991). He addresses problems in recognizing the mode of a composition
from the disposition of its cadences, including the final one. He recommends that, in addition to considering the modal final, it is necessary to consider the "form [forma] of the entire composition":
Whenwe have to judge a composition,then we shall have to examine
it carefullyfrombeginningto end and see in what form it is composed
. . . Thiswe can do by keepingan eye on cadences,whichthrowa great
lighton this matter.In this way we shallbe able to judge in whatmode
the compositionis written,even if the compositiondoes not end on the
properfinalof the mode but ratheron the mediannote, or some other
note which has suited the composer'spurpose.
If we shouldend a compositionon a note other than the finalit would
not be out of place, since churchmen
also did this in their chants ...6
47

The theorist describes, for example, a chant which is in the Dorian
mode, but which ends on the confinal A, the note that divides the octave D-d harmonically. Zarlino emphasizes cadential organization as
a means of defining the mode. In order to establish the mode, the internal cadences must be carefullyconstructedso that, despite the final
cadence, the true modal final is never in doubt.7
Gallus Dressier, in his Musicae practicae elementa (1571), echoes
Zarlino's sentiment that the internal organization of a composition
helps define the mode, especially since the final cadence can be regular or irregular:
Whatdo you call an irregular
ending?When songs do not end on the
tone destined for them, but on another. By observingthe species of
fourth and fifth, such an ending is recognizedwith little difficulty.In
musicoften an irregular
mensural
endingis insertedfor the firstpartof
the song, of whichthe secondpartthatsucceedsit then ends regularly.8
By identifying the possible placement of an irregularclose at the end
of the prima pars, Dressier addresses the compositional function of
such an irregularending. The harmonicallyopen gesture of the irregular cadence is answered by the more conclusive secunda pars, in the
manner of an antecedent and consequent. In this case, the irregular
ending is dependent for its closure on the proper cadence that follows.
But Dressier also admits the possibility of an irregularending at the
ultimate close of a composition: "it must not be overlooked that irregular endings often are conceded to the first part of a song when a
second part is expected, but that the final ending is constructedirregularly more rarely."9
Seth Calvisius, in his Melopoiia (1592), further explores the musical effect of the irregularending, suggesting that it creates an expectation for continuation, and that it should not be used at random, but
only with reason:
Then the end is built on the properand perfectcadence of the mode;
it cannot be made on an improper,peregrine,or imperfectcadence,
because these cadences, by their imperfection,place the mode of the
in
harmony doubt, and suspendthatharmony,so to speak, and change
it into such a formthat listeners,detainedby the hope and expectation
of somethingto come, awaitsomethingmoreperfectwhichwouldconstitute the end. Also, offence would be made againstthe popularrule
in
of musicians: the end its tone will appear.Althoughthe mode of the
harmony
oughtto be revealedeverywhere,it ought to be done most at
the ending, by which,all its goodness, elegance, and perfection is
are
judged. And althoughcounterexamples found in works by good
authors,neverthelesshe.who will have examinedthe agreement the
of
48

harmonywithits textwill findthat it [the regularending]is not usurped
at random,nor withoutthe most serious reasons."
With his final remark, Calvisius identifies a possible reason for closing
irregularly-a composer might choose such an ending in order to express the affective content of the text."1
From these brief excerpts of sixteenth-century writings we can
make the following statements about confinal endings: (1) An irregular ending is possible, provided that the mode is otherwise well established; (2) The mode will be so established by the internal cadences
and melodic organization; (3) The irregular ending can be used to
close the first part of a two-partcomposition and even, although more
rarely, to close an entire work; (4)The irregularending creates an expectation for continuation. When it occurs at the end of the prima
pars, the continuation is realized in the secunda pars. When it occurs
at the ultimate close, the sense of expectation might be justified as an
affective setting of the text. From (4) we can understand that modal
theorists heard such harmonicmovementfunctionally;that is, they engaged analytical values such as harmonic expectation and harmonic
closure. A confinal close did indeed have a striking effect on the finality of the composition.
These earlier theorists did not offer specific harmonic solutions for
irregularendings. During the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries,
however, certain theorists established descriptive terms for different
root progressions. In so doing they instructus further in the interpretation of the harmonic progression from final to confinal. I will begin
with seventeenth-century definitions of harmonic progressions that
engage the fifth relation and the irregularending. I will then examine
the remarks of the selected eighteenth-century theorists who admit
the possibility of the confinal ending, especially in the context of chorale composition.
Herbst (1643) distinguishes two types of formal cadences-the
falling-fifth progression, as shown in example 2a, and the fallingfourth (or rising-fifth) progression, as shown in example 2b.12 Each
formal cadence has three parts-antepenultimate-penultimateultimate; specific melodic progressions are designated for each voice
part within the scheme. Herbst does not judge the completeness or
incompleteness of the falling-fourth progression, but he does tell us
where this progression is customarily used. In those cadences which
close in MI, (for example, with the soprano moving E-D-E) the
falling-fifthprogression that is given in example 2c is impossible because of the false fifth between B and F in the penultimate chord; for
such cadences, therefore, the falling-fourthprogressionof example 2b
is advised.13
49

b)

a)

A

v

0

(, 0

A

O
J

0

o

J

0

:0

c)

-

Si9O
0

40
u
43

0

j
WOu-u

t

irtlr

0

a

0
53

o-

0

4

Example 2: Herbst (1643)
Herbst allows for the possibility of another cadence form, also a
falling-fourthor rising-fifthprogression, but this time with a different
interpretation. Earlier, I cited his discussion of regular and irregular
melodic endings. During this discussion he provides an example of the
irregularclose. He describes the situation in which an internal movement might close on a confinal in order to indicate that there is
more to come. Herbst specifies the harmonic derivation of such a cadence: the cadence is an incomplete form of the antepenultimatepenultimate-ultimate formal cadence. The ultimate chord is held
back and does not appear until the final cadence of the following
movement. He describes a two-part composition and demonstrates
with an example, reproduced as example 3. This can also be realized
in a three-movement work-the first and last movements have the
complete form of the cadence and the middle one is incomplete
(Herbst 1643, 86-88). In addition to the strategic placement of an irregular close at the end of a 'prima pars" or internal movement,
Herbst identifies the possibility of a final irregular close, especially
"when it is called for by the text."'4
Wolfgang Caspar Printz develops a highly formalized system of
modal cadences and harmonic function in his Phrynis Mitelenaeus,
oder SatyrischerComponist (1676). Printz defines an extensive list of
cadential progressions involving a full vocabulary of chords and cadence types.'5 A thorough review of his cadence systems is not possible here, but a brief summarywill shed further light on the confinal
ending. First, cadences are classified as perfect and reposeful, or im16
perfect and not reposeful. These types are subdividedfurther, genevarious forms and inversion. A general distinction can be made
rating
between the perfect and imperfect categories: the perfect cadences involve bass motion by fifth, falling or rising, and the imperfect mostly
involve bass motion by step. It is the former with which we are concerned here.
The perfect or reposeful cadences are subdivided into two categories, as shown in example 4: totalis, or complete, which is a fallingfifth progression, and dissecta, or interrupted, which is a rising-fifth
50

A

Secunda pars

Prima pars

J o "LJ?v

Jo

r r,

(t

r

"LJ
?

1u

1

-?

Example 3: Herbst (1643), IrregularEndings

ClausulaeFormales
Imperfecta

Perfecta
[reposeful]

Totalis
[complete]
[falling 5th]

Dissecta
[interrupted]
[rising 5th]
Desiderans
[unresolved]
[=I-VI

Acquiescens
[resolved]
[=IV-I]

Example 4: Printz (1676)
progression. The dissectais further subdivided into two forms: the desiderans, or unresolved interrupted cadence, and the acquiescens, or
resolved interruptedcadence. In his table of modal cadence patterns,
the unresolved interruptedcadence is realized as a harmonicprogression from the modal final to its fifth (in modern terminology, from I to
V), and the resolved interruptedis realized as a progression from the
fourth degree to the modal final (IV to I). Example 5 reproduces the
perfecta totalis, dissecta acquiescens and dissecta desideranscadences
for the Dorian mode.
Keeping in mind that both forms of the dissecta cadence are classified at a higher level as perfect and reposeful, we can consider
Printz's comparison of the resolved and unresolved interrupted cadences. He classifies the different cadence formulas according to
whether the last chord-the one that is required to complete the formal cadence-is explicitly stated (sedes expressa, "an explicit place")
or implied (sedes subintellecta, "an implicit place"). The totalis or
complete perfect cadence is considered to be of the former category,
as is the dissectaacquiescensor resolved interruptedcadence. The dissecta desiderans, or unresolved interrupted cadence, however, is of
51

Example 5: Printz (1676)

the latter type, because a final chord is required to make it complete
(Printz 1676, ch. 8, ??28-31).
In his practical application of the formal cadence types to the
modes, Printz makes one more remark concerning the unresolved
form of the interrupted cadence (dissecta desiderans). He indicates
that it is not appropriateat the end of a melody, "since it stimulates
the emotions and makes one anxious to hear more"; it is appropriate,
however, if the desired effect is to create this sense of expectation.'7
During the eighteenth century, theorists continue to engage modal
theorectical issues, especially as they are relevant to the harmonization of chorale melodies. Of particularinterest to us are two of Bach's
students-Johann Philipp Kirnberger and Johann Christian Kittelwho aim, in their theorectical writings, to explicate their teacher's musical practice.
Kirnbergerexplicitly addresses the problem of finding a harmonic
solution for a cantus firmus with an irregularending. He makes the
following remarks about the chorale "Durch Adams Fall":
Among the hymns, there are a few which do not close with the principal note. For example,the choralemelody "DurchAdamsFall" . . .
is Dorian but closes on the fifth of the main [mode]. Such cadences
must be treated in conformitywith the main mode. Thus it would be
faultyif one were to concludethe cited choralein A witha minorthird.
The cadencemustbe as shownin [example6] (Kirnberger
[1776]1982,
330).
Kirnberger'sharmonic solution is to hold onto the A in the cantus
long enough that the final gesture can be from a D-minor triad to an
A-major triad, creating what might be recognized as a "half cadence"
from i to V in D. I interpret his comments above to mean that the
major third, Ct, of the final triad on A is crucial in order to define A
as a dominant and not as a tonic. The final melodic gesture of both
rather be harmonized by the progression
melodies-B4-A4-might
52

o

IMI

#

6

(s o
#?

r o

Example 6: Kirnberger (1776)

?
0
f

si

(3
O

87
7
8tl

0o
5

? o

0 o0 -0

00j

6
6

l

UtU 0O

6
5

00 0

4

0O

5 l

6
45

0

Example 7: Turk (1787)
from V to I in A, but Kirnbergerdoes not favor this progression. He
wishes to suggest the function of A as the dominant of D.
Following Kirnberger,Daniel Gottlieb Turk also identifies "Durch
Adams Fall" as a "melody that closes not with the harmony of the
tonic, but rather with an interval of the dominant harmony .. ."18
He maintainsthat this occurs often in melodies of the old modes, and
he advocates using the major third in the last chord to help define the
tonic. His examples of such closes, given as my example 7, are quite
similarto the Kirnbergerexample. The final note of the cantus firmus,
A, is sustained while the harmony defines A major as the dominant
and D minor as the tonic in the final half cadence.
Kirnbergerand Turk thus solve the problem of the irregularending
with a half cadence from tonic to dominant. Their solutions, however, do not accuratelyreflect Bach's compositional practice. His harmonizationsof "Durch Adams Fall" and "Christ,unser Herr" present
final authenticcadences that tonicize the confinalor fifth degree. 9 Example 8 reproduces the final phrase from each chorale. Part II of this
paper will demonstrate that the larger harmonic progression of each
chorale is indeed form tonic (D) to dominant (A), but the final cadence on A is itself a perfect cadence in A and not a half cadence in
D. Perhaps Kirnberger'ssolution is an idealized formula intended to
convey the larger function of D as modal final and A as confinal.
Johann Christian Kittel, in his Der angehende praktische Organist

(1808), provides an interesting interpretationof "Durch Adams Fall."
He studies the cantus firmus phrase by phrase, exploring what he
53

a)

'

^M^ :^
I

io I

,

I 1

'^

---I

I-~
I
bi) 'r
'

;

I

rLr I "rJ FL'r 'J.
I
1zm1?:,
11

-~

Example 8: a) Final phrase, "Christ, unser Herr," BWV 176/6;
b) Final phrase, "Durch Adams Fall," BWV 18/5
a)

j

rj

j

i:! .
r

In

-

f

"1

-n

r vr

"

r! '
,

,II II

Example 9: Kittel (1808)
refers to as "modern" harmonizations versus "Dorian" harmonizations.2"When he reaches the final phrase of the tune, he presents two
Dorian solutions and several modern settings. We will concern ourselves here with the two modal harmonizations. The first, shown in
54

example 9a, is classified as "Dorian, with a plagal cadence"; the second, given in example 9b, "is of a similar type, but the harmony is
different" (Kittel [1808] 1982, 3: 46-47). Both cadences are dominanttonic resolutions in A; the second solution is quite similar to Bach's
own harmonizationin BWV 18/5, reproduced earlier as example 8b.
Kittel's harmonic solutions and his brief classifications of them as
"Dorian, with a plagal cadence" illustrate his theoretical conception
of the confinal ending. First, Kittel understandsthe cadences on A to
be conventional within the Dorian modality. A second observation is
the more remarkable: in both solutions, the final cadence resolves
from dominant to tonic in A, yet Kittel describes these as "plagal"
cadences. Certainly he cannot be referring to the harmonic cadence
E-A as a plagal gesture; he is more likely referringto the higher-level
function of the cadence on A within the harmony of D.
The historical theorists reviewed here substantiate an interpretation of these two chorales as Dorian, ending on the dominant. In the
hands of an eighteenth-century composer such as Bach, what does it
mean to conclude a multi-movementwork with a cadence on the dominant? The earlier theorists suggested that such an unresolved ending
could be justified as an affective representation of the text. In the following analyses, I will consider the individual chorales as well as the
larger textual and tonal plan of the cantatas to which they belong. It
will not be possible here to provide a thorough text/music analysis of
these cantatas, but an overview will establish a broadercontext for the
detailed analysis of the individual chorales.
Part II: Analysis
Cantatas 176 and 18 are similar in textual and tonal design. Examples 10 and 11 provide the texts of cantatas 176 and 18, respectively.21
The larger tonal structure of each cantata is indicated along the lefthand column of these examples. The modality of the final chorales is
indicatedby the label "d/a," symbolizingthe polarity of these degrees.
In each cantata, the tension between D and A in the final movement
is prepared by earlier tonal events. Indeed, it is the very first tonal
relationship to be explored in both compositions; in example 10, the
first movement exposes a harmonic progression from A minor to D
minor and back; in example 11, the first and second movements in A
minor are followed by the third movement in D minor. The tonal connection from the opening movement to the final chorale of each cantata has significant implications for the interpretationof the confinal
ending; indeed, the cantatas in question begin in A, and the closing
chorales tonicize A in the final cadential progressions, seeming to
55

Example 10: Textt and tonal plan* of Cantata 176, "Es ist ein trotzig
und verzagt Ding" (text: M. von Ziegler)

tText and tranlation e Hanssler-Verlag, Neuhausen-Stuttgart,
1984. (Used by permission.)
*Tonal organization based on the transposition of the cantata down
a third from C to A.

d

e

[

e

56

Es ist ein trotzig und verzagt
Ding um aller Menschen Herze.

There is a daring and a shy
thing about the human spirit.
2. Recitative (A)

Ich meine, recht verzagt,
DaB Nikodemus sich bei Tage
nicht,
Bei Nacht zu Jesus wagt.
Die Sonne multe dort bei
Josua so lange stille stehn,
So lange bis der Sieg vollkommen
war geschehn:
Hier aber wiinschet Nikodem:
O Sah ich sie zu Riiste gehn!

I think it very shy
That Nicodemus did by day come

3. Aria

3. Aria (S)
Thy dear light, before so bright,
Must for me the clouds obscure,
While I go to seek the master,
For by day I am too fearful.
No man can these wonders do,
For his nature and vast power,

4. Recitativo

a

1. Chorus [Dictum] (S, A, T, B)

Dein sonst hell beliebter Schein
Soil vor mich umnebelt sein,
Weil ich nach dem Meister frage,
Denn ich scheue mich bei Tage.
Niemand kann die Wunder tun,
Denn sein Allmacht und sein
Wesen,
Scheint, ist gottlich auserlesen,
Gottes Geist muB auf ihm ruhn.

a-d-a

1. Coro

2. Recitativo

[ad

4. Recitative (B)

So wundre dich, o Meister, nicht,
Warum ich dich bei Nacht ausfrage!

So marvel then, O Master, not,
That I should thee at night be
seeking!

not,
By night did Jesus face.
The sun was forced one day for
Joshua so long to stand in place,
Until at last the victory was
fully won;
Here, though, did Nicodemus
wish: O would the sun now go to
rest!

It would seem, by God are chosen;
God's own Spirit on him rests.

Example 10: (continued)

C

d
a

C

I'm fearful, lest by daylight
My weakness could not stand the
test.
And yet I hope thou shalt
my heart and soul
To life exalt and take.
For all men who in thee believe
now shall not be forsaken.
5. Aria (A)

Ermuntert euch, furchtsam und
schichterne Sinne,
Erholet euch, horet, was Jesus

geschicht,
Werd ich dort oben
Mit Danken und Loben
Vater, Sohn und Heilgen Geist
Preisen, der dreieinig hei3t.

Have courage now, fearful and
timorous spirits,
Recover now, hear ye what Jesus
doth pledge:
That I through belief shall now
heaven inherit.
When this great promise fulfillment achieves,
Shall I in heaven
With thanks and with praises
Father, Son and Holy Ghost
Honor, the Three-in-One named.

6. Choral

e

Ich fiirchte, daB bei Tage
Mein Ohnmacht nicht bestehen
kann.
Doch trost ich mich, du nimmst
mein Herz und Geist
Zum Leben auf und an,
Weil alle, die nur an dich glauben,
nicht verloren werden.
5. Aria

a

6. Chorale (S, A, T, B)

Auf daB wir also allzugleich
Zur Himmelspforten dringen
Und dermaleinst in deinem Reich
Ohn alles Ende singen,
DaB du alleine Konig seist,
Hoch iiber alle Gotter,
Gott Vater, Sohn und Heilger
Geist,
Der Frommen Schutz und Retter,
Ein Wesen, drei Personen.

Rise, that we may now all as one
To heaven's portals hasten:
And when at last within thy realm
May we forever sing there
That thou alone sweet honey art,
All other gods excelling,
God Father, Son and Holy Ghost,

verspricht:
DaB ich durch den Glauben den
Himmel gewinne.
Wenn die VerheiBung erfiillend

rd/a]

Of good men shield and Savior,
One being, but three persons.

57

Example 11: Textt and tonal plan of Cantata 18, "Gleichwie der
Regen und Schnee vom Himmel fallt" (text: E. Neumeister)
tText and translation @ Hanssler-Verlag, Neuhausen- Stuttgart,
1984. (Used by permission.)
1. Sinfonia
2. Recitativo
Gleichwie der Regen und Schnee
vom Himmel fallt und nicht wieder
dahin kommet, sondern feuchtet die
Erde und macht sie fruchtbar und
wachsend, daJ3sie gibt Samen zu
sien und Brot zu essen: Also soil
das Wort, so aus meinem Munde
gehet, auch sein; es soil nicht
wieder zu mir leer kommen,
sondern tun, das mir gefallet, und
soil ihm gelingen, dazu ich's
sende.

2. Recitative [Dictum] (B)
Just as the showers and snow from
heaven fall and return again not
thither, rather give the earth moisture and make it fertile and fruitful, so it gives seed for the sowing
and bread for eating: Just so shall
the word which from mine own
mouth proceedeth, be too; it shall
not come again to me empty, but
shall do what I have purposed and
shall that accomplish for which I
send it.

3. Recitativo e Litania

F

1. Sinfonia

3. Recitative (T, B) and Litany
(S, A, T, B)

Tenor
Mein Gott, hier wird mein Herze
sein:
Ich offne dir's in meines Jesu
Namen;
So streue deinen Samen
Als in ein gutes Land hinein.
Mein Gott, hier wird mein Herze
sein:
d
LaB solches Frucht, und hundertfaltig, bringen.
0 Herr, Herr, hilf! o Herr, la3
wohlgelingen!
d Du wollest deinen Geist und Kraft
zum Worte geben.
a-.-Fd
Erhor uns, lieber Herre Gott!
BaB
Nur wehre, treuer Vater, wehre,
DaB mich und keinen Christen
nicht
Des Teufels Trug verkehre.
Sein Sinn ist ganz dahin gericht',
Uns deines Wortes zu berauben
Mit aller Seligkeit.
Den Satan unter unsre FiiBe
a-F-d
treten.
Erhor uns, lieber Herre Gott!
Tenor
e
Ach! viel' verleugnen Wort und
Glauben

58

(T)
My God, here shall my heart
abide:
I open it to thee in Jesus' name
now;
So scatter wide thy seed then
As if on fertile land in me.
My God, here shall my heart
abide:
Let it bring forth in hundredfold
its harvest.
O Lord, Lord, help! 0 Lord, O
let it prosper!
(S, A, T, B)
That thou might to the word thy
Spirit add, and power,
O hear us, O good Lord, our God!
(B)
But keep us, faithful Father, keep
us,
Both me and any Christian soul,
From Satan's lies attending.
His mind has only one intent,
Of this thy word to rob us
With all our happiness.
That Satan underneath our feet
be trodden,
O hear us, O good Lord, our God!
(T)
Ah! Many, word and faith renouncing,

Example 11: (continued)

a-F-d

g

a

a-F-d

F-d-a-

F-d-ad-F

[d/a

f

Und fallen ab wie faules Obst,
Wenn sie Verfolgung sollen leiden.
So stirzen sie in ewig Herzeleid,
Da sie ein zeitlich Weh vermeiden.
Und uns fur des Tiirken und des
Papsts
grausamen Mord und Lasterungen,
Wiiten and Toben vaterlich behiiten.
Erhor uns, lieber Herre Gott!
BaB
Ein andrer sorgt nur fur den
Bauch;
Inzwischen wird der Seele ganz
vergessen;
Der Mammon auch
Hat vieler Herz besessen.
So kann das Wort zu keiner Kraft
gelangen.
Und wieviel Seelen halt
Die Wollust nicht gefangen?
So sehr verfihret sie die Welt,
Die Welt, die ihnen muB anstatt
des Himmels stehen,
Daruber sie vom Himmel irregehen.
Alle Irrige und Verfiihrte wiederbringen.
Erhor uns, lieber Herre Gott!

4. Aria
Mein Seelenschatz ist Gottes Wort;
AuBer dem sind alle Schatze
Solche Netze,
Welche Welt und Satan stricken,
Schnode Seelen zu bericken.
Fort mit allen, fort, nur fort!
Mein Seelenschatz ist Gottes Wort.

5. Choral
Ich bitt, o Herr, aus Herzens
Grund,
Du wollst nicht von mir nehmen
Dein heilges Wort aus meinem
Mund;
So wird mich nicht beschamen
Mein Siind und Schuld, denn in
dein Huld
Setz ich all mein Vertrauen:
Wer sich nur fest darauf verlaBt,
Der wird den Tod nicht schauen.

Now fall away like rotting fruit,
When persecution they must suffer.
Thus they are plunged in everlasting grief
For having passing woe avoided.
And from all the Turk's and all
the Pope's
Most cruel murder and oppression,
Anger and fury, fatherlike protect us.
O hear us, O good Lord, our
God!
(B)
One man may but for belly care,
And meanwhile is his soul left
quite forgotten;
And Mammon, too,
Hath many hearts' allegiance,
And then the word is left without
its power.
How many are the souls
By pleasure not the captive?
So well seduceth them the world,
The world which now they must
instead of heaven honor,
And therefore shall from heaven
stray and wander.
All those now who are gone and
led astray recover.
O hear us, O good Lord, our
God!
4. Aria (S)
My soul's true treasure is God's
word;
Otherwise are all those treasures
Mere devices
By the world and Satan woven,
Scornful spirits for beguiling.
Take them all now, take them
hence!
My soul's true treasure is God's
word.
5. Chorale (S, A, T, B)
I pray, O Lord, with inmost
heart,
May thou not take it from me,
Thy holy word take from my
mouth;
For thus shall not confound me
sin and shame, for in
My
thy care
I have all mine assurance:
Who shall steadfast on this rely
Shall surely death not witness.

59

round off a large tonal progression. Given this broader context, perhaps these chorales should be understood in A, rather than D. Certainly that interpretationwould admit tonal closure, while the confinal
interpretation does not. I favor the confinal interpretation, but I am
interested in how the final cadence of each chorale creates an unresolved modal structureat the level of the individualmovement, while
at the same time creating a closed tonal structure at the level of the
entire cantata.
The text of Cantata 176 is translatedin example 10. In this work the
duality of the mode depicts the dichotomy of human nature that is the
main textual issue. The cantata is based on an incident related in the
Gospel according to St. John [iii, 1-15] in which Nicodemus is afraid
to visit Christ by daylight. The first movement is a choral fugue on a
quotation from Jeremiah:"There is a defiant and a faint-heartedthing
about the human spirit (Es ist ein trotzig und versagt Ding um aller
Menschen Herze)." In this movement the larger tonal organizationis
from A minor to D minor and back to A minor.
The conflict between human weakness and strength expressed in
the opening dictum is the basis of the texts that follow. The first recitative comments on Nicodemus's fear of meeting Jesus by daylight, a
fear represented by A minor. A reference to the sun, textually linked
with victory, is sung in D minor, but the recitative ends by invoking
once again the fearful Nicodemus, this time in E minor, the fifth degree of A. The third movement, an aria, makes explicit that Nicodemus's avoidance of light symbolizes his fear of Christ, who in turn
represents God. The key of the aria is G major, approachedfrom the
recitative as III of E minor, the dominantof A. The fourth movement,
a bass recitative, is a personal expression of Nicodemus's weakness,
sung in E minor with a reference to the A minor tonic. The fifth movement is an appeal to faith, sung in the mediant of A minor, C major.
The final chorale, the eighth strophe of Gerhardt's"Wasalle Weisheit
in der Welt," sung to the tune "Christ, unser Herr, zum Jordankam,"
is a more positive assertion of faith, with no implications of doubt or
weakness. The harmonic language of the chorale is not, however,
equally dogmatic in its assertion of a modal final. Rather, an ambiguous musical setting casts a reflective shadow over the decisive expression of faith. This musical irony is a fitting commentaryon the nature
of the text. While, at the local level-within the context of the chorale
alone-the final triad on A may be perceived as the dominant of D
minor, within the larger context-the entire cantata-A is perceived
as the tonic, and thus the final cadence refers us back to the key of the
opening movement and to the expression of humankind'sdual nature.
The text of BWV 18 is translatedin example 11. Cantata 18 is based
on the parable of the sower, from the Gospel according to St. Luke
60

[viii, 4-15] in which the seed is portrayed as the word of God: the
seeds that yield fruit are likened to those who accept God's word, and
the seeds that do not bear fruit are likened to those who are distracted
from the word of God by the Devil. The basic premise, therefore, is
once again the duality of the human spirit-strength or faith versus
weakness or sin. The opening movement is a Sinfonia in A minor.
This is followed by a recitative in A minor, the text of which is a passage from Isaiah [55, 10-11] that likens God's word to fruitful seed.
The third movement is a recitative and litany appealingto God for the
strength to resist evil. The recitative statements are interrupted by
choral phrases based on Luther's litany, which have the refrain
"Erhor uns, lieber Herre Gott." Each of these choral statements are
supported by an overall harmonic progression from A minor through
F major to D minor. The movement closes ultimatelyin D. The fourth
movement takes up one verse from the parable which claims that
God's word is the only treasure and that other treasures are the devices of Satan. The aria is in F major but its harmonic scheme again
refers us to D minor and A minor. The final chorale is the eighth
strophe of Spengler's hymn "Durch Adams Fall." The text is a reflective plea for God's assurancethat His word will be granted despite the
sins of human beings. In its modal conflict between D and A, the
music complements the dual sentiments of fear and hope that are expressed in the chorale. Once again, the modal conflict within the chorale itself may not be ultimatelyresolved by the final cadence in A, but
within the context of the entire cantata, the final cadence connects
with the opening key of A minor.
In the analyses that follow, the reductive approachis clearly Schenkerian, although his system is expanded to accommodate certain
modal features of these chorales. The purpose of this paper is not to
categorize Dorian or Aeolian modal patterns, but it will be necessary
duringthe course of our analyticaldiscussion to define certain of these
patterns as they occur.22
The chorale "Christ, unser Herr, zum Jordan kam," BWV 176/6
is analyzed in Sketch 1, which appears over two pages.23The chorale
appears at the bottom of the page, with two different deep middleground interpretations aligned above it-a Dorian interpretation, in
which the role of modal final is assigned to D, and an Aeolian interpretation, in which the modal final is analyzed as A. The Overview of
Sketch 1 also provides the different Ursatze that derive from the
Dorian and Aeolian analyses. I shall discuss both interpretations in
order to evaluate the degree to which it is possible to hear the chorale
in Dorian and Aeolian.
The Dorian Ursatz provides an interpretation of the chorale as
Dorian, ending on the dominant. In this interpretation, the chorale
61

4

5___

Dorian Ursatz

K F

F
r5F

ti

A

A

8

1

2

3

7

A

6

5

L

r

A

5

AA

4

3

A

2

A

1

Aeolian Ursatz

?

6

6
4

6

6
4

5

Overview of Sketch 1
does "close" in an Schenkerian sense, at an earlier point. That is,
there is an Urliniedescent and a completed Bafibrechung.The Dorian
Urlinie is a 5-line in D accompanied by a bass arpeggiation of the
D-minor harmony. The Urlinie completes its descent to i accompanied by a clear harmonic closure in D. A dotted barline indicates the
harmonic and melodic closure. Following this closure the Ursatz begins again, as it were, with the reestablishment of the Kopfton and
tonic support. A final gesture turns the harmony toward the dominant, which is left unresolved. To indicate the open-ended structure,
I will borrow Schenker's symbol for interruption (11).
In the Dorian Sketch, two melodic gestures appear to control the
soprano voice. The first is a characteristicDorian pattern in which the
Kopfton A4 is prolonged by means of its upper third C5 in the manner
of a neighbor-note figure, A4-C5-A4. The C5, labelled a "Dorian
UpperNeighbor"(DOR-UN), is flaggedto symbolizeitsmelodicembellishing function.24The second melodic gesture prolongs the Kopfton
A4 in a descending fifth-progressionfrom A4 to D4. Throughout the
Dorian sketch, the DOR-UN prefaces every instance of the fifthprogression from A to D in the structural soprano voice, including
the final descent. When the DOR-UN figure is heard again in mm.
17-18, it creates an expectation for a subsequent descending fifthprogression, but this expectation is never realized.
62

In the music, the DOR-UN figure of m. 2 is composed out as a
3-Zug (C5-B4-A4) that tonicizes A. The A-minor cadence of m. 2 is
immediately followed by the D-minor cadence of m. 4. The DOR-UN
figure of m. 6 is similarly tonicized in an A-minor cadential progression that is again followed by a D-minor cadence in m. 8. These opening four phrases, therefore, express a tonal conflict by alternating
cadences on A and D.
The Dorian Sketch analyzes the cadences on D as tonic, but one
can also entertain hearing A as tonic. The Aeolian interpretationaccepts the modal final as A rather than D. The Aeolian Urzatz (which
appears in the Overview of Sketch 1) contains as its Urlinie an 8-line
descent. The line begins by descending from A4 to D4; it then continues, after an octave transfer, from D5 down to A4. The Kopfton is
first supported by tonic, and then by subdominantharmony. D minor
as subdominant is prolonged, during mm. 7-8, in the cadential progression i-iv6-V []-5-i as the Kopfton descends from 8 to 4 in the
Urlinie. The final descent from 4 to 1, is harmonized by iv6-V [4]-I
in A. The tiered system of beams in the Baf3brechung
symbolizes the
prolongation of A through its subdominant.
In the Aeolian Sketch, the plagal relation between A and D is further developed. The opening A-minor triad which supports the Kopfton is approached by an initial subdominant and then embellished by
a plagal progression A-D-A. In addition, 4, established in m. 8 with
subdominant support, is sustained in mm. 11-16 through a complete
octave-progression from D5 to D4.
While a subdominantemphasis is not unusualin the Aeolian mode,
the Ursatz of this choral does pose certain problems. The interrruption of the octave descent at scale degree 4 articulatedby the registral
shift is unusual. To avoid an interruption in the obligatory register,
one might try to find a Kopfton in the same register as the final cadence, a 3 (C5) or 5 (E5). But the repeated linear progressions from
A4 down to D4, harmonized in D minor, make it impossible to prolong C5-C is dissonant against the D-minor harmony that is so
strongly defined in m. 8 and m. 16. And since E5 is never prolonged
in the soprano, it is not really a contender for Kopfton status. The
descent from 8, which prolongs the Aeolian octave from A to A while
at the same time accounting for the emphasis on D throughout the
chorale, is the best alternative. However, the division of the Aeolian
octave into the descending fifth A4-D4 and the descending fourth
D5-A4 does not outline the species of fifth and fourth that define the
Aeolian mode, but rather the Dorian mode. The historical theorists
discussed earlier (Dressler, for instance) suggest that the mode is defined by the internal cadences and by the species of fifth and fourth.
From that point of view the Aeolian sketch shows a paradigmatic
63

(m.

1

2

3

Sketch

4

"Chri,

ur

zum

Jn

K"

Sketch 1: "Christ, unser Herr, zum Jordan Kam"

C.

4T

00

C.

4-

4-

C.

*)

-'

I

0

U
U

C.

-1

h-.)

40

Dorian disposition, despite my attempts to find an Aeolian analytic
solution.
The Aeolian Ursatz, therefore, reveals a strong emphasis on the
harmonyof D within an A-minor prolongation. The Urliniedescent is
not entirely satisfactoryas an expression of the Aeolian octave since it
divides at 4, articulatinga registral shift just before the final cadence.
The Dorian Ursatz is also problematic since it denies modal closure,
ending on the dominant A instead of the tonic D. The two sketches
reveal the degree to which it is possible to understand the chorale in
Dorian or Aeolian; in either case, a tension between D and A emerges
at the highest level of structure. Let us consider the deep middleground levels once again to discover how the D/A conflict is expressed.
In the Aeolian Sketch, 4 (D) and the harmony of D minor are established at the cadence of m. 8 and prolonged until m. 17. During
mm. 11-16, 4 is prolonged by means of a descending octave progression from D5 to D4; D5 introduces the upper register to which the
soprano will return in m. 17 for the final descent. Thus, within the
larger articulationof the interrupted Aeolian octave descent there is
an uninterruptedarticulationof a descending Dorian octave. The first
leg of the Dorian octave descent, from D5 to A4, is supported in the
bass by the falling fifth sequence G-C followed by E-A. The E-A
resolution coincides with the cadence of m. 12, after which the octave
descent continues from A4 to D4 and the harmonyresolves to D. The
last phrase of the chorale repeats the melodic descent from D5 to A4
and (with some modifications) the harmonic progression from mm.
11-12. A more detailed Aeolian analysis of mm. 17-18, given in example 12, shows the bass recalling the falling fifth sequence of mm.
11-12-the bass falls G-C followed by the structuralresolution from
E to A. In the final phrase, however, neither the melodic descent nor
the bass progression continue to a resolution in D. Our expectation,
established by the events of mm. 11-16, is denied.
A thematic connection within the Dorian octave descent of mm.
11-16 also helps undermine the final A cadence. In my opening discussion of the cantus firmus (example la), I pointed out a thematic
relationship between the melodic phrase of mm. 11-12 and that of
mm. 15-16. The latter phrase (mm. 15-16) is a tonal imitation of the
former, and the melodic gestures that lead to a cadence on A in m. 12
are adjusted to lead to a cadence on D in m. 16. In the Aeolian
Sketch, the phrase in mm. 15-16 is analysed as a strong cadential progression in D which concludes the octave descent from D5 to D4. The
melodic and harmonicmaterialof mm. 11-16 might thus be viewed as
a question-the phrase in mm. 11-12 -that is answered or resolved by
mm. 15-16. When the same question is posed again in the final
66

A

A

s 7

A

A

3

4

2

1

J

N

J

]

.

(17)

6

6
4

I

Example 12: "Christ, unser Herr," Aeolian foreground sketch, mm.
17-18.

phrase, we expect, but do not hear, a similarresolution. The thematic
and harmonic recollections of the final phrase strengthen a Dorian
rather than an Aeolian interpretation.
Now let us return to the Dorian Sketch to consider the same musical passage. The fifth progressionfrom A4 to D4 in mm. 7-8, which
was analyzed in the Aeolian Sketch as the structuraldescent to 4, is
here presented as a lower-level 5-Zug which prolongs the Kopfton A4
and the tonic D harmony. A4 is reestablished in m. 9 and is then prolonged by a DOR-UN figure supported by the dominant, A. The soprano's D5 in the music of m. 11 would be reduced, at a lower level,
to an upper neighbor embellishment of the DOR-UN, C5. Whereas
the Aeolian Sketch gives priority to the D5 by initiating a descending
Dorian octave descent, the Dorian analysis reduces D5 to the role
of an upper neighbor, assigning priority instead to the C5. In the
Aeolian Sketch it is necessary to give analytic weight to the D5 since
the structural soprano pitch being prolonged is D4; in the Dorian
Sketch, the structuralsoprano remains on A4 and its prolongation by
the DOR-UN figure is idiomatic. (The structuralsoprano pitch cannot
be A4 in the Aeolian Sketch since that is the assumed tonic for the
analysis, and a prolongation of A4 throughoutthe chorale would deny
any kind of Urlinie descent.)
In my discussion of the Aeolian Sketch, I considered the thematic
connection between mm. 11-12 and 15-16 as support for a Dorian
interpretationof the chorale. That is, the melodic and harmonic material of mm. 11-12 in A minor is answered by that of mm. 15-16 in
D minor. The return of the A-minor material in the final phrase appears to prepare for a continuation in D that is never realized. Yet
another thematic conflict between D and A is resolved by mm. 15-16
in the Dorian reading. In the Dorian foreground sketch of m. 5, given
as example 13a, the soprano begins the phrase with an ascending
67

a)

b)

Example 13: "Christ, unser Herr," Dorian sketch, mm. 5-6 and mm.
15-16.

fifth-progressionfrom D4 to A4, accompanied by a stepwise descent
in the bass from D3 (through B1) to F2. After the triad on F, the harmony turns toward A, and cadences in that key (m. 6). In the foreground sketch of m. 15, given as example 13b, the soprano once again
begins the phrase with an ascending fifth-progressionfrom D4 to A4,
again accompaniedby a stepwise descent from D3 (through Bk,)to F2.
Now, however, the harmony does not turn toward A, but rather toward D for a strong cadential progression in that key.
Based on thematic considerations, therefore, an interpretationthat
assigns D as the modal final best expresses the melodic and harmonic
formulationsof this chorale. The Dorian interpretationappears not to
be entirely satisfactory, however, since it subverts modal closure. In
either sketch, there remains a conflict between D and A at the highest
level of structure. Since this is the final chorale of a cantata, the unresolved tension between D and A is particularlyproblematic. The
larger tonal scheme and the text of the cantata offer some explanation
for the unresolved conflict within the final chorale. The cantata text
explores the textual issue of humankind's duality, which is reflected
(especially in the first movement) by the harmonic opposition of A
minor and D minor. The final choral of cantata 176 may not lend itself
successfully to a detailed text/music analysis in its own right, but it is
interesting to consider its broader textual effect at the end of the
largerwork. The final chorale text (given in example 10) dogmatically
asserts faith in the trinity but its modally ambiguous harmonization
casts a layer of doubt that is prepared by the tonal and textual duality
of the earlier movements.
The chorale "Durch Adams Fall ist ganz verderbt," BWV 18/5 is
analyzed in Sketch 2.25 This chorale also expresses a modal conflict
between D and A; Sketch 2 thus presents a Dorian as well as an
Aeolian interpretation. The Dorian Ursatz given in the Overview of
68

A

A

A

A

A

A

5

4

3

2

1

5

^J

r

J^

^

^

Dorian Ursatz

for

Lr

pt

:w

A

A

A

A

A

A

A

A

8

7

6

5

4

3

2

1

Aeolian Ursatz

L-F
j

5
6

6

r

Overview of Sketch 2
Sketch 2 comprises a S-line descent from A4 to D4. The Kopfton is
established with tonic support. Following the initial D in the bass,
there is a descending arpeggiation of the tonic triad from its fifth,
A-F-D; the F is prolonged by a fifth progressionF-C-F. The descent
from 5 through 4 to 3 is treated locally as a third-progressionharmonized by the I-V-I movement in F major. D minor is reestablished as
support for 3 and the descent through 2 to i is harmonized by a cadential dominant-tonic progression. Following the tonic closure, the
Kopfton is reintroduced, supported first by tonic and then by dominant. The concluding dominant is never resolved.
In the Dorian Sketch, given immediately above the chorale, the
DOR-UN (C5-A4) is present once again as an embellishment of
the Kopfton. The UN is heard twice before the final Urliniedescentfirst harmonized by A minor and then by F major-and once after
the Urlinie descent, harmonized by A minor. As in the previous chorale, because we have heard the DOR-UN preceding the structural
fifth-progressionin D, the final DOR-UN suggests an unrealized continuation.
The tonal closure in D occurs quite early in the Dorian sketch (m.
8). Two additional phrases follow (mm. 9-13) which articulate the
final harmonic gesture from D to A. A more detailed sketch of mm.
69

8
r-

A

(f

-

. --J

*--

J

Aeolian Sketch

C

(
(m.

r

[C

1

2

3

5

4

5

DOR-UN

DOR-UN

Dorian Sketch

Y'

r

#

r

rrr

Sketc

r

"Durch

A

s

I

nz

Sketch 2: "Durch Adams Fall ist ganz verderbt,'

9

8
A

A

11

10
A

D

Dorian Sketch

--

Stc

@8+

+?

Q'r

r

foe.

TrSketch 2 (continued)

N DOR-UN

I
_O5

)

i

AOL-LN

1

T

r

(9)

Example 14: "Durch Adams Fall," Dorian foreground sketch, mm.
9-13.

9-13 appears in example 14. The penultimate phrase (mm. 9-10) is
analyzed as a prolongation of G as V of C, resolving to C in m. 11. In
the voice-leading sketch of example 14, G4 in the alto is analyzed as
an "Aeolian Lower Neighbor" (AOL-LN), the diatonic seventh degree of the Aeolian scale (G) functioning as a full-step lower neighbor
to A.26 (It is important to note here that the alto of the voice-leading
sketch does not necessarily correspond to the literal alto voice in the
music; the G4 is in fact first introduced by the soprano in m. 9. but is
taken up by the alto voice at the end of m. 10.) Example 14 analyzes
the G4 in m. 11 as the fifth of C major; it resolves up to A4 as the
harmony changes to a first-inversion D-minor triad. A is then tonicized in a final V-I cadence; the soprano composes out the DOR-UN
pattern C5-A4 as in a 3-Zug in A minor. This analysis exposes the
conflation of D and A in the final two phrases-while the alto gesture
over mm. 9-11 is an Aeolian lower neighbor figure A-G-A, the final
soprano gesture is analyzed as a Dorian upper neighbor, tonicized by
A minor.
The Aeolian Ursatz is given in the Overview of Sketch 2. Here the
Urlinie is an 8-line descent, comparable to that of "Christ, unser
Herr," which descends from A4 to D4 and continues, after a register
transfer, from D5 down to A4. An emphasis on the subdominant is
realized in a descending Baf3brechung from A through F to D. The
tiered system of beams symbolizes the unconventional prolongation
of A through its fourth degree, D, and the mediant of that fourth degree, F.
The Kopfton A4 is established at the outset with tonic support. As
8 is held, the harmony changes to F, which is then prolonged in a
I-V-I progression as support for the descent from 8 through I to 6
which is heard locally as 3-2-i in F. The harmony of F yields to the
harmony of D as support for 8; D is then prolonged through a i-V-i
progression as support for the descent from 6 to 4, which is heard
72

locally as 3-2-i in D. 4 is then transferredup an octave while the bass
returns to F; the descent from 3 to i is harmonized by a V-I progression in A.

As in the other chorale, the Aeolian sketch is not successful as a
clear expression of the Aeolian mode. Rather, the subdivision of the
Aeolian octave into a descending fifth A-D followed by a descending
fourth D-A actually projects the Dorian species of fifth and fourth.
Once again, the Aeolian sketch shows a paradigmaticDorian disposition, despite my efforts to explore an Aeolian analysis.
The interpretation that this chorale is Dorian, ending on the confinal can be justified as an expression of the text, not only of the chorale itself but of the cantata as a whole. The modal conflict between D
and A complements the dual sentiments of fear and hope that are expressed in the chorale. Once again, the modal conflict within the chorale itself may not be ultimatelyresolved by the final cadence in A, but
within the context of the entire cantata, the final cadence connects
with the opening key of A minor.
In both cantatas, one hears the musical opposition of D and A in
the context of a textual conflict between strength and weakness in
human nature. In neither text nor music are these polar opposites resolved by the endings of the compositions. The final chorales, in their
unresolved modal organization, refer us back to the opening movements of the cantatas, and thus to the symbolic duality of the text. The
circular connection suggests that there is no end or solution to the
problems posed.
NOTES
1. The terminology used to describe the confinal ending is problematic. Sixteenthand seventeenth-century theorists who discussed irregular endings certainly did
not invoke the term "dominant." I will, however, occasionally refer to "dominant" and "tonic" harmonies, especially during the analytical discussions.
2. In example la the cantus firmus "Christ, unser Herr, zum Jordan kam," as it
appears in BWV 176/6, is transposed. Cantata 176 presents the melody a minor
third higher, but the transposition of the example restores the cantus firmus to
its original pitch level. The transposition of BWV 176 is offered for the purposes of our analytical study and is not to be imagined as the composition itself.
(Incidentally, another setting of this tune by Bach (BWV 280) does present the
chorale at its original pitch level.)
3. "Regularis ist/wann der Gesang in del Modi rechtem naturlichen Clavel
nemblichen in Clausula principali sich endet. Irregularis ist/wann die Stimmen
nicht in ihrem natiirlichen Sitz oder Clave, sondern in einer andern Clausula
nemlich minus principali sich enden/ein Exampel ist der Gesang: Christ unser
Herr zum Jordan kam. Item/Durch Adams Fall: da das End irregularis ist/weil
es sich im A endet/da es doch im D sich enden solte" (Herbst 1643, 86). It is
important to note here that Herbst uses the term minus principali in the way

73

that most theorists use affinalis or confinalis. In his tables of modal cadence
formulas (which are too extensive to be reproduced here) the minus principalis
cadence occurs consistently on the fifth note of the mode in the soprano voice.
4. Others have also classified the melodies in question as Dorian. Bernhard Meier
([1974] 1988, 342) cites both tunes as examples of confinal endings. Conrad
Matthaei (1652, 86) identifies "Durch Adams Fall" as a Dorian melody, although he does not explicitly identify it as having an irregular ending. Johann
Christian Kittel ([1808] 1981, 3: 37-48) chooses the Dorian melody "Durch
Adams Fall" to demonstrate modal harmonic practice. He compares different
"Dorian" and "modern D minor" harmonizations of each phrase. I shall return
to Kittel's remarks later.
5. Meier [1974] 1988, 225. Meier dedicates a chapter to the subject of "Modally
Irregular Exordia and Endings," part 2, chapter 3, 330-354. He reviews the
sixteenth-century theoretical sources that address the issue of the irregular ending. In particular, he focuses on the use of irregular endings to depict an unusual text; he explores this possibility through the analysis of several compositions. Although I do not wish simply to repeat his work, many of the theoretical writings he cites will be helpful to us here.
6. Zarlino [1558] 1983, 90-91. Elsewhere, Zarlino defines the median note as the
harmonic division of the diapason, which is the fifth above the final in the authentic modes. Zarlino's point about the importance of internal cadences in
judging the mode is not original; Aron and Glarean discuss the role of the characteristic intervals of a mode, and not only the final, in defining the mode
(please see Zarlino's footnote, p. 90).
7. Although it is not my purpose in this paper to investigate thoroughly Zarlino's
modal cadence schemata, I will point out one problem inherent in Zarlino's
system: the cadences for each mode occur on the same degrees-i, 3, and 5.
This system breaks down for the Phrygian and Mixolydian modes, where cadential emphasis on those degrees is not possible because of the false fifth on B.
Zarlino still insists upon his i-S-3 schema of cadences in these modes, but he
must find a way of accounting for the compositional emphasis on 4. He does so
by relying upon the theoretical concept of mixture. For a thorough discussion
of this subject, the reader may refer to Burns (1991, 12-15).
8. Dressier 1571, bk. 2, ch. 7. This passage is translated by Meier ([1974] 1988,
338).
9. Dressler 1563/64, ch. 14. This passage is translated by Meier ([1974] 1988, 339).
10. Calvisius 1592, ch. 17. This passage is translated by Meier ([1974] 1988, 341).
The emphasis is mine.
11. Meier explores the subject of confinal endings and text expression, analyzing
several compositions that end irregularly and relating the final cadences to the
text ([1974] 1988, 344-354).
12. Herbst 1643, 58-62. For a comprehensive discussion of seventeenth-century cadence theories, the reader may wish to refer to Jakoby (1955).
13. In the Phrygian mode, for instance, the falling-fourth cadence as it is shown in
example 2b is the progression used to create modal closure. This paper will not
investigate thoroughly Herbst's modal cadence systems; the present discussion
simplifies his work somewhat. A more thorough discussion of Herbst's cadences
will be found in Burns (1991, 18-22).

74

14. Herbst (1643, 84) cites as an example a song by Orlando di Lasso, "Frohlich zu
sein," relating its irregular ending to the text. Meier also discusses this song
([1974.] 1988, 343).
15. Printz (1676) discusses the modal cadences in chapter 8, ??34-42. Chapters 9
and 10 also discuss the modes. Printz's cadence formulas carried theoretical importance into the eighteenth century. His influence is seen, for instance, in
Johann Gottfried Walther's modal cadences, presented in the Musikalisches
Lexikon of 1732.
16. "Perfecta ist/welche die Melodey oder Zusammenstimmung zur Ruhe fiihret/
also daB darmit ein vollkommenes Ende einer vollkommenen Melodey oder
Harmony kan gemacht werden. . . Clausula formalis [im]perfecta [sic] ist/
welche sich zwar zur Ruhe neiget/aber doch die Harmony nicht zur Ruhe
fiihret/dal3 mit einer solchen ein vollkommenes Final einer vollkommenen
Melodey und Zusammenstimmung konte gemacht werden/sondern die Melodey etlicher massen auszeucht/und das weiter solle fort gesungen werden/
andeutet" (Printz 1676, ch. 8, ??4 and 11).
17. "Clausultaformalis perfecta dissecta desiderans wird am Ende der Melodey
nicht leicht gefunden/weil sie das Gemuth gleichsam auffzeucht/und mehr zu
horen begierig macht:/Es sey dann/daB man ein Verlangen andeuten wolle"
(Printz 1676, ch. 8, ?40).
18. ". .. die Melodie nicht mit dem Akkorde der Tonica selbst, sondern mit einem
Intervall des Dominantenakkords aufhort. . ." (Turk 1787, 67).
19. Bach's solution is in keeping with tradition. Settings of "Christ, unser Herr"
and "Durch Adams Fall" by Praetorius, Schein, Scheidt, and Telemann, for
instance, also treat A as a local tonic in the final phrase.
20. Kittel [1808] 1981, 3:37-48. Kittel does not present an abstract theoretical system in the manner of his colleague Kirnberger but rather takes a practical approach to the study of organ chorale harmonization. His discussion of "Durch
Adams Fall" is especially interesting if one wishes to compare harmonic language in Dorian modality versus D-minor tonality, but that topic is beyond the
scope of this paper.
21. The tonal scheme of example 10 is based on transposition down a third, in keeping with the transposition of Sketch 1 and my discussion of Cantata 176. This
transposition will facilitate the theoretical and analytical discussion of the two
chorales under investigation. The text and translation given in example 10 are
reproduced from Ambrose (1984, 414-15). The text and translation given in
example 11 are reproduced from Ambrose (1984, 60-61).
22. For a discussion of Dorian and Aeolian modal patterns, please refer to Burns
(1991, chs. 5 and 6).
23. Again, I wish to remind the reader that the chorale has been transposed down
a minor third, in order to restore the cantus firmus to its original pitch level and
in order to facilitate our discussion of the Dorian confinal ending. The chorale
is catalogued in the Bach Compendium 1/4, F65; it is the final chorale of cantata
"Es ist ein trotzig und versagt Ding" (Bach Compendium I/1, A92). The musical text in Sketch 1 is based on Neue Bach-Ausgabe 1/15, 35-36.
24. Edward Phillips has discussed neighbor relationships at the interval of a third
(1981, 98-116). He identifies the interval of a third as an important characteristic of organization in the chorale. In his discussion, the concept of neighbor

75

note "is expanded to allow the ornamental pitch to be a distance of a second or
a third from the principal pitch, either above or below." Phillips examines several melodies in which C acts as an upper neighbor to A. The neighbor-note
configuration A-C-A can be presented in its pure form, or the motion from C
to A can be filled in with a passing tone B. The DOR-UN figure is discussed at
length in Burns (1991, 215-219).
25. The chorale is catalogue in Bach Compendium 1/4, F52; it is the final chorale of
the cantata "Gleichwie der Regen und Schnee vom Himmel fallt" (Bach Compendium 1/4, A44b). The musical text in Sketch 2 is based on the Neue Bachausgabe 1/7, 132 (2nd version).
26. Aeolian progressions are discussed in Burns (1991. 266-271).

Works Cited
Bach References
Ambrose, Z. Philip. 1984. The Texts to Johannl Sebastian Bach's ChulrchCantatas.
Neuhausen-Stuttgart: Hanssler.
J. S. Bach. Neue Ausgabe simtlicher Werke (Nele Bach-Alusgabe). Edited by the
Johann-Sebastian-Bach-Institut of Gottingen and by the Bach-Archiv of
Leipzig. Series I-VIII. Kassel and Basel, 1954-.
Schulze, Hans-Joachim and Christoph Wolff. 1985-89. Bach-Compendium:
Anal'tisch-bibiographisches Repertoriumlder Werke Johalnn Sebastian Bachs.
Vol. 1, Vokalwerke. Parts 1-4. Leipzig: Edition Peters.
Theoretical Works
Burns, Lori A. 1991. J. S. Bach's Chorale Harmonizations of Modal Cantus Firmi.
Ph.D. diss.. Harvard University.
Calvisius, Seth. 1592. Melopoiia. Erfurt.
iiber die Entstehuttg derl harmoniDahlhaus, Carl. [1968] 1990. Unttersluchlngeni
sclhen Tonalitat. Kassel: Barenreiter. Translated by Robert O. Gjerdingen as
Studies on the Origins of Harmontic Tonalitys.Princeton: Princeton University
Press.
Dressier, Gallus. [1563/64] 1914-15. Praecepta musicae poeticae. MS, 1563/64. Edited by B. Engelke in Geschichts-Blitter fiir Stadt lund Land Magdeburg 49/50:
213-50.
. 1571. Musicae practicae elementa. Magdeburg.
Herbst, Johann Andreas. 1643. Musica poetica. Niirnberg.
iiber die Klaitsellebtre deultschenMusikin
Jakoby, Richard. 1955. Unterstuchungent
traktaten des 17. Jahrhunderts. Ph.D. diss., Mainz.
Kirnberger. Johann Philipp. [1771-79] 1982. Die Kunst des reitnenSatzes in der
Mlusik.2 vols. Berlin, 1771-79. Translated by David Beach and Jiirgen Thym as
The Art of Strict Musical Composition. New Haven: Yale University Press.
Kittel. Johann Christian. [1801-08] 1981. Der angehende praktische Organist. 3
vols. Beyer and Maring: Erfurt. Facsimile edition by Peter Williams in vol. 72
of Bibliotheca Organologica. Buren: Frits Knuf.
Matthaei. Conrad. 1652. Kurzer, doch autsfiihrlicherBericht 'onlden Modis Musicis, welchen aus den besten, iltesten., beriihmtesten tundbewerthesten Autoribus
der Music zumsalmmnengetragen.
Konigsberg: Johann Reusner.
76

Meier, Bernhard. [1974] 1988. Die Tonarten der klassischen Vokalpolyphonie.

&
Utrecht:Oostok, Scheltema Holkema,1974.Translated Ellen S. Beebe as
by
The Modes of Classical Vocal Polyphony. New York: Broude Brothers, 1988.

in
of
Phillips,Edward.1981."PitchStructures a SelectedRepertoire EarlyGerman
Chorale Melodies." Music Theory Spectrum 3: 98-116.

Powers, Harold. 1982. "Modal Representationin PolyphonicOffertories."In
Early Music History 2: Studies in Medieval and Early Modern Music. Edited by

Ian Fenlon. Cambridge:
Cambridge
UniversityPress.
Printz, Wolfgang Caspar. 1676. Phrynis Mitelenaeus, oder Satyrischer Componist.

Christian
1696.
Okels; 2d edition, Dresden-Leipzig,
Quedlinburg:
Tiirk, Daniel Gottlob. 1787. Von den wichtigsten Pflichten eines Organisten: ein
Beytrag zur Verbesserung der musikalischen Liturgie. Halle.
Walther, Johann Gottfried. [1708] 1960. Praecepta der musikalischen Componisten.

MS, 1708. Edited P. Benary.Leipzig:Breitkopfund Hartel.
Zarlino, Gioseffo. [1558] 1983. Le Istitutione harmoniche 4. Venice. Translated by

Vered Cohen as On the Modes. New Haven:Yale UniversityPress.

77

