Yale University Department of Music

Schenker's High-Level Motives
Author(s): Allen Cadwallader, William Pastille, Schenker
Source: Journal of Music Theory, Vol. 36, No. 1 (Spring, 1992), pp. 119-148
Published by: Duke University Press on behalf of the Yale University Department of Music
Stable URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/843912
Accessed: 16/12/2009 05:31
Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of JSTOR's Terms and Conditions of Use, available at
http://www.jstor.org/page/info/about/policies/terms.jsp. JSTOR's Terms and Conditions of Use provides, in part, that unless
you have obtained prior permission, you may not download an entire issue of a journal or multiple copies of articles, and you
may use content in the JSTOR archive only for your personal, non-commercial use.
Please contact the publisher regarding any further use of this work. Publisher contact information may be obtained at
http://www.jstor.org/action/showPublisher?publisherCode=duke.
Each copy of any part of a JSTOR transmission must contain the same copyright notice that appears on the screen or printed
page of such transmission.
JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide range of
content in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and facilitate new forms
of scholarship. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.

Duke University Press and Yale University Department of Music are collaborating with JSTOR to digitize,
preserve and extend access to Journal of Music Theory.

http://www.jstor.org

SCHENKER'S HIGH-LEVEL MOTIVES

Allen Cadwallader
WilliamPastille
It is well known that in the final stage of his career, Schenker abandoned the use of the term "motive" to describe aspects of the compositional process. What is not well known are the reasons that led to
this rejection, and the great extent to which Schenker'sthinkingabout
the role of motive in music had changed duringthe development of his
ideas.1 In his Harmony (1906), for example, Schenker gives the following definition of motive:
The motif is a recurring
series of tones. Any series of tones may become a motif. However, it can be recognizedas such only where its
repetitionfollows immediately.As long as there is no immediaterepetition, the series in questionmust be consideredas a dependentpart
of a greaterentity, even if later on, somewherein the course of the
composition, the series should be elevated to the rank of a motif
(Schenker[1906] 1954, 4-5).
Although the insistence on immediate repetition may seem somewhat
out of the ordinary, this description reflects the spirit of most customary definitions, because it still considers motive to be a phenomenon
of the musical surface.
Three decades later, in Free Composition (1935), Schenker's view
of motive had been radicallyaltered by his prolonged study of musical
substructure;one could hardly have foreseen the extreme position he
would adopt toward his earlier conception. Example 1 shows how
much Schenker'sthinking had changed, and provides some indication
119

of why he now distrusted surface motivic connections. Taken from
Free Composition,this sketch shows two passages from a Chopin Nocturne.2 An analyst guided only by motivic associations at the surface
level would likely derive the passage in bars 11-12 from the opening
motive of the piece; but Schenker considers such a derivationillusory.
He says:
Even within the foreground,figurations
frequentlyappearwhich are
based on previous statementsin the foreground.The occurrenceof
both statementand variant(figuration)at the foregroundlevel-that
levels withinthe foreground-creates
is, the presenceof two structural
the illusionthat the variantbelongsonly to the foregroundstatement,
but in fact, throughthis statementit also relatesto the background
and
middleground
(Schenker[1935]1979, 96).
That is to say, as the sketch shows, both statements derive from the
same middleground pattern, the first statement being one structural
level that is furthertransformedinto the second statement. This transformation would not be possible without the more determinate motivic pattern in the middleground,and it is therefore a mistake to seek
the origin of the figured version solely in its precursorat the surface
(see example 1).
This example and others like it in Free Compositionpoint to Schenker's rejection of his earlier conception of motive and to his negation
of analyticalmodes that invoke motivic manipulationor "transformation" to explain, for example, the generation of contrastingformal divisions or the workings of development sections in sonata forms.
Toward the end of his life, Schenker simply disavowed the notion that
the examination of motives, in the sense of tone successions that unfold at the surface level, yield any significantinsights into the nature
of the compositional process. This consideration raises two important
questions: How did Schenker arrive at such a radical reversal in his
thinking? And what, precisely, did Schenker come to accept as an alternative to conventional motivic analysis?
It is evident that the definition of motive given by Schenker in Harmony probably would have led to some form of conventional motivic
theory, had something not arisen to change his conception. What catalyzed Schenker's thinking about motive-and, indeed, his thinking
about analysis in general-was melodicfluency, which he formally introduced in CounterpointI (Schenker [1910, 1922] 1987, 1:94-95).
Melodic fluency is essentially a name for good voice leading in strict
counterpoint, that is, motion primarilyby steps, with skips carefully
controlled. This characteristicof strict counterpointtakes on great importance when Schenkerbegins to apply it to free compositions and to
look for melodically fluent lines just beneath the surface of the music.
120

Chopin,Nocturneop. 15 no. 2

(third
prog

I

t)

f

r

--

t,

(6-

a) mm.1- 2:

~

Ifr^~~~

Example 1. Sketch of Chopin: Nocturne in F
11-12 (from Schenker, Free Com

Example 2 shows two melodically fluent versions of excerpts from a
free composition.3Example 2A reveals a line that is, as Schenkerputs
it, "the ultimate product of ascending and descending figurations"in
Bach's D-minor English Suite (Schenker [1910, 1922] 1987, 1:96); example 2B shows three separate, melodically fluent, contrapuntal
voices underlyinga polyphonic melody from a later point in the same
piece. These two examples also show that two types of results may be
expected when the principles of melodic fluency are operative beneath, rather than at, the musical surface. First, long-range connections may be established, as in example 2A; second, underlying
contrapuntalpatterns may be revealed, as in example 2B.
This application of melodic fluency to free composition is the crucial step that led to Schenker's recognition of structurallevels and,
eventually, to his discovery of the Ursatz.4The same application also
began to change Schenker'sideas about motivic structure, because in
these melodically fluent lines, he found motivic relationships not obvious at the surfacelevel; he could now begin to comprehendthe technique of concealed motivic repetition.5
b.l

2

3

9
I8 1Fi110
8

9

10

4

6

5

7

12 13 14
15-r
11

12

13

r^i r'r'i r^r'TTTTT1
^Tr'i

14

15

'^~~~~~~~~~~~~etc

Example 2A. Sketch of J. S. Bach: English Suite No. 6 in D Minor,
Prelude; mm. 1-15 (from Schenker, Counterpoint I
[1910])
for:
a)

b)

.

Example 2B. Sketch of J. S. Bach: English Suite No. 6, Prelude; mm.
165-166 (from Schenker, CounterpointI)
122

Readings similar to those in example 2 are found in Schenker's
work even as early as the 1909 analysis of Bach's ChromaticFantasy
and Fugue, but his 1920 analysis of Beethoven's Piano Sonata op. 101
marks the first extended application of melodic fluency to underlying
motivic relations. The sketches shown in example 3 reveal a motivically significantfluent line of a descending fourth in the second movement of the sonata.6The relationshipsof example 3A are not difficult
to perceive. The descending fourth is the primarycomponent of the
graphlabeled Urlinie(in this context, the term Urlinierefers simply to
a foreground reduction of the music), but there is also a motive consisting of a descending third that arises from the inner-voice counterpoint in bars 4 and 6. The sketch labeled Ausfuhrung (the final level
of elaboration) indicates that this third-motive is the diminution that
expands the final repetition of the germinaldescending fourth from fl
to c' (see bars 7-8 in the Urlinie graph).
The relationshipssketched in the graph of example 3B are of a different order. For example, the bass progression at level e, the lowest
staff, reveals in bars 11-36 a motivic recurrenceof the same descending fourth-motive that opens the movement in bars 1-4; even the
chromatic passing tones are present. A glance at the score makes it
clear why such motivic parallels must be called "hidden":these connections are difficultto perceive because of the many interveningcontrapuntal and harmonic motions in the long stretches between bars
11-19 and bars 25-36.
Two important facts about Schenker's application of melodic fluency to free composition arise from example 3. First, by identifying
motivic activity in the melodically fluent lines beneath the surface,
Schenker expands the issue of motivic relations into another dimension; in addition to the obvious occurrences of motivic groups on the
surface, there are also other relationships,involvingdifferent motives,
on another level. Second, because of the voice-leading principlesgoverning melodically fluent lines, the motivic elements of such lines will
consist mainly of step-wise motion.
But there is a third importantfact not illustratedby the sketches in
example 3. Schenker sees the presence of higher-level motives as a
liberatingforce for the surface motivic relations; he places freedom of
motivic association at the surface, while positing a certain amount of
necessity in motivic association at the higher levels. In the introduction to the op. 101 analysis Schenker writes:
On firstlookingat the Urlinien, shouldnot allowoneself to be disone
illusionedby the fact that they all resembleone anotherin continual
successionsof seconds, in repetitions,or also in a regularrise and fall,
like breathingin and breathingout. For it is preciselythe task of the
123

Urlinie:
T. 1

2

3

4

Ausfiihrung:
I

A

?b
v

{ Ti

I

I

JX

J^

J

I

-

-l

-

I

ab3) lI?I
?fi;M

r - r rr T_r'!
4

5 - 6

I'.A

3

7 - 6

6

-

IV -

V

I

Example 3A. Sketch of Beethoven: Sonata
(from Schenker, Beethoven: O

T. 11

a) Vdur

12

13

14

15 16 17

18

19

5 6
IV VII III V15-6VIilJ3V4
(IV) d moll

I/VI - 13
a moll

b) Vdur I/VI - 13IV
a moll

V/II3V4
d moll

20

21

5
I3

I

22

24

23

3

V13-

3

I/VI
f dur

25

26

IV

#V7/VIS
V dur (en

II

V bVI -

c)

d)

t
e)

r
irr

Vdur III

VI

6 -s.

4Chrom.Dg 3
2-

u-eI

F1'-

w

3

by

Example 3B. Sketch of Beethoven: op. 101/II; mm. 11-37 (Schenker, Beethove

artist to bring forth his own tensions by means of this determinate
numberof seconds,these specificrepetitions,this specificrise and fall;
elicit fromthe risingandfallinglines, in concertwiththe
to continually
basic laws of voice leading and harmonicstep progression,new versionsof his own motivesandmelodies,andthusto resolveeach general
case into its particulars:
semperidem,sed non eodemmodo-more the
artistcannot do (Schenker[1920]1972, 8).
A remarkableinstance that demonstratesthe relation between surface freedom and underlyingnecessity is shown in example 4, a sketch
of the Eb-minor Prelude from Book I of the Well TemperedClavier,
published in Der Tonwille 1 (1921). This sketch reveals that the motivic relations of the melodically fluent lines beneath the surface consist of multiple repetitions of a single motive, a descending third.
After commenting on the great variety of ways in which the thirdmotive is produced and shaded by different harmonicdegrees, Schenker proceeds to a brief discussion of the surface motives. He writes:
that
The firsttone of the Urlinie,bar 1, gives birthto an arpeggiation
whichis confirmed
also lays claimto independentmotivicsignificance,
not only by the repetitionin bar 2, but also by its furtherapplications:
see, for instance, the inversions in bars 4, 6, and so forth ...

or the

alterationin bar 3. [These remarksrefer to the score of the piece.]
... In bar 4, the line ends at gb1. Now if in the Urliniea repetition
of the motive were to follow beginningwith this pitch, then, because
the motive alwaysfalls, the line would have been forced to descend
wouldhardlybe possibleon account
into a registerin whichdiminution
of the very close proximityof the two outer voices-to say nothingof
that arises from not exploitingthe
the purely sonorousdisadvantage
higheroctaves. With a simplebut ingeniousdevice [that is, the figure
beginningon the downbeatof bar 4 of the score] the Urlinieis moved
octave. Now, when in what
up to the registerof the double-stroked
followsthe same dangerand necessityreturnand are alwaysmet in the
same fashion,this device also seems to be elevatedto the statusof an
independentmotive, which then contributesin its own way to propagatingthe illusionthat one is dealinghere with a completelyseparate
world in which the freest development of motives is the only law
(Schenker1921, 39).
On the surface, then, motivic association can occur in ways that seem
haphazard,because the freely distributedsurface motives are carried
along by the necessity inherent in the underlying Urlinie motives.
The next step in the development of Schenker's thinking followed
from his increasing awareness of the multiplicity of structurallevels
during the publication of Der Tonwille (1921-1924). Examples 5 and
126

,

Q

l

,W

^ 8o^*"'
^

'"'
***
w^s - t.. .,.

IIIb7

VI

I3

IV

IVII(

I

V

JI
I

:~)

bl

[ !',. dbo)

'

I/II

b?
... 4

IV V

6j---~
;

I L. o
t,o.
IV

I

lVII(V)

(tv)

o
.

r ;'
bo,,. -

IV V 7

.

'|
oI

........-.I L

VII(V)

Clavier,Pre
Example 4. Sketch of J. S. Bach: The Well-Tempered
Der Tonwille 1 [1921])

6, graphsof the theme (an aria) and thirdvariationof Brahm'sHandel
Variations (1924), illustrate that Schenker has logically extended the
principle of surface freedom and underlying necessity to all analytic
levels.7 In example 5, for instance, the primarymotivic association at
the
level d is that of rising and falling third-progressions; determinate
succession of these motives then supports the free introduction of a
new motive-the neighboringtone-at level e. As one approachesthe
surface, the freedom of motivic associationbecomes even greater, and
tiny reflections of the higher-level motivic elements begin to appear.
Thus, the level below g shows a diminished form of the rising thirdmotive of level d taking place within the neighboring-tonemotive of
levels e and g. The score reveals further diminutions of the neighboring-tone motive and the rising third motive in the trills on the second beat of every measure.
Viewed in this light, the motivic surface of the music now begins to
shimmer: multiple diminished reflections of the higher-level motives
float on a plane that is supportedand shaped by the very same motives
acting in more determinate successions beneath the surface. It is
merely a consequence of the principleof melodic fluency that the motives of the higher levels are extremely abstract and simple-in this
case only third-progressionsand neighboring tones. These more determinate, abstractmotives might be called high-level motives.
Example 6 provides another instance of the activity of high-level
motives that illuminates the role of the higher levels in variation sets.
A simple relocation of one of the neighbor notes of the theme (g2 in
example 5, bar 3) from a weak position to a strong one (g2 in example
6, bar 4) produces a different underlying necessity in the variation.
The accented neighbor engenders a IV harmonyin the motion from I
to V, a new scale step that changes the shape of all the levels and,
particularly,the content of bar 4 of the theme. For example, the accented neighbor g2 and the subdominant, which are in force for two
beats, displace the tone of resolution, the primarytone f2, to the weak
part of the bar (in the theme, this f2 occurs on the downbeat, within
an expanded tonic). The metric accentuationof the upper neighbor g2
in the variation effectively inhibits f2 from moving into an inner voice
and thus prevents the phrase from ending with 2 over V (compare bar
4, respectively, in the lowest levels of examples 5 and 6).
The repositioning and structural harmonic support of the upper
neighbor-note g2 consequently alter the characterof the highest level
in the variation, giving rise to a high-level motive-an accented neighboring tone-that had not been present in the theme. Furthermore,
the generation of this high-level motive is communicated to the surface of the piece, where the effect of the accented upper neighbor can
128

T. 1

2

4

3

5
o
a

a)

B dur:
b)

i

___
_

?

I
__

8.
10

10

V_

A

1

,_

...V..

10
B dur: I

.

.

-10
A

2

A
AA A

3

A

3 4

5

o
10

.-o:

I
3

-e)--?....
I

10

~A

(Nbn)

~5(Nbn)
i

3
--,

(

?rt
10

Example 5. Sketch of Brahms:Varia
del, op. 24/Aria (from Sc

J
(Nbn)

3 (Nbn)

'~
B dur:

(IV V
10

Bdur:

I

(IV

V)

I

I

Nbn) ( Nbn b4)

(,

r
r'rmrrr..V

)
(N

).

rr
V

(I

-

V

Example 5 (continued)

V

T.

1

2

4

3

5

6

7

8

(Nbn)

iJ

a)
B dur:

I

(NbU)

L

IV

V

V

(Nbn)

(Nbn)

b)

|

T1
bF>i

I

IV

IV V

I

V

V

t

l4Fe[+
I

IV

V

A....
_-- -)

!(6
(b4

"7

I

(IV

V)

I

I

IV

V

t36
3

V

Example 6. Sketch of Brahms: Handel Variations, Var. 3 (from Schenke

be felt in the many emphatic appoggiaturasthat are the most noticeable foreground characteristicof the variation.
The specific attributesof motivic elements at different analyticlevels is finally addressed directly by Schenker in Das Meisterwerkin der
Musik I (1925). In his analysis of the Largo from Bach's third Sonata
for solo violin, Schenker explicitly links levels and motives together.8
Referring to the upper three systems shown in example 7, he says:
level carrieswith it its own motives[see levels b andc];
Eachstructural
and
the specificorganization growthof these motivesparallelsthe specific organizationand growthof the level to which they belong. The
nearerthey are to the foreground,the more developedand variedthe
motiveswill be (Schenker[1925]1976, 152).
At this point, however, the word "motive" has an unmistakablynew
meaning. Schenker says:
[Level b] shows the firststages of the diminution,the motives of the
firstorder:the unfoldingof the uppervoice into progressions
through
into
the sixth,fifth,andfourth,transfers the lowerandhigherregisters,
andso on. All of these motivesare produced the uppervoice which,
by
verticalintervals[see level a]
in its constantrise and fall, transforms
them. In
and
into melodicprogressions leaps, therebyhorizontalizing
other words, the motivesserve as links betweenthe upperand middle
voices (Schenker[1925]1976, 143-144).
Here the term "motive"is clearly applied to the constituent transformative elements of Schenker's method-that is, linear progressions,
arpeggiations,octave transfers, and the like. These abstractelements
now have the status of motives in Schenker's thought; indeed, these
elements are his high-level motives.
Bars 1-4 of example 7 illustrate how these high-level motives operate. Level b shows two high-level motives in those measures-an ascending arpeggiated sixth followed by a descending sixth, which is
subdividedinto a third-arpeggiation
plus a descending fourth. At level
c, a new motive-an ascending third-arpeggiation-adds life to the
opening arpeggiated sixth in bars 1-3. Finally, at the level labeled
"Largo," we see yet more new motives used to flesh out the rising
thirds of level c.
This example underscorestwo significantpoints. First, the motives
that unfold at the deepest levels of the middlegroundare very general;
they express the most fundamental intervallic components of triadic
unfolding. As the surface and foregroundlevels are approached,however, the choice of motives becomes considerably freer, because the
132

a)

8

Ib,
'

JJe

=i
-6

5-

I

Harmonic

steps askeys I

F major

6

5

I-II--V-lIIV

2

6-7-6-5
(II)-

V

C major

Example 7. Sketch of J. S. Bach: Sonata for Solo Violin No. 3, Largo; mm. 1-7 (fro
in der Musik I [1925])

transformationaleffects of diminution are constrained less at lower
levels than at higher ones. The only requirementis that the motives at
each level express the tonal content of the previous level. In other
words, even if level b began with a different motive, it would still have
to express the initial triad; even if level c did not use thirds, its motive
would still have to act in the service of level b's rising sixth; and any
other motives in the "Largo"level would have to conformto the needs
of level c's third-arpeggiations.Thus freedom and necessity coexist at
every level and stand in a delicate balance.
Second, as the transformationsapproachthe foreground, there is a
tendency to "bringdown" high-level motives into the diminutions of
lower levels. For instance, the outline of a sixth that characterizesthe
motive of the "Largo"level is a reflection of the high-level motive of
the sixth from level b. Thus the foreground levels, and especially the
surface of the music, incorporatemotivic elements from earlier levels
both in the large and in the small, giving rise to cross-level motivic
integration and the characteristicshimmering effect mentioned earlier.
Having uncovered this variegated motivic activity across many
transformationlevels, Schenker now comes to regard surface motivic
relations with some suspicion. In the same article he writes:
We see how the composer's
createsa foreground,
imagination
bringing
forthmotiveswhich,by virtueof theirliteralpresencein the music,are
so readily accepted as "melodies"by the ear incapable of hearing
is
longerspans.But the sourceof the "melodies" revealedonly through
an understanding successivestagesof voice-leading,beginningwith
of
the fundamental
structure.
The specificshapesof suchmelodiesare determinednot by the whim of an imaginationconcernedwith nothing
but
more than"melody," ratherby the necessitythatthe voice-leading
structure
(Schenker[1925]1976,
processbe anchoredin a fundamental
148-150).
In Free CompositionSchenker finally rejects the term "motive"altogether, or, more accurately, he uses the term only in a pejorative
sense. Instead of "motive," Schenker talks about the relationships
among diminutions, a word he feels has broader application and that
he uses in his own special way to denote the linear patternsthat unfold
at different structurallevels. And the diminutionsat the deepest level
of the middleground, the first elaborations of the fundamentalstrucof
ture, Schenker now refers to simply as the "characteristics the first
level of the middleground."9We can now better understandpassages
like the following in Free Composition, indicating that Schenker's attitude toward the role of motive in music is now inimical to conventional views of surface motivic structure:
134

vision. For this reasonthey do
Greatcomposerstrusttheir long-range
not base their compositionson some "melody,""motive,"or "idea."
transformations
and
Rather,the contentis rooted in the voice-leading
whose unity allows no segmentationor names of
linear progressions
segments(Schenker[1935] 1979, 26-27).
Given what we now know about high-level motives, it is not difficult
to understandwhy Schenker came to embrace this extreme attitude:
he had discovered that the source of lower-level motives is found in
motives of a higher order, which he believed to be inherent in the
grammarof the tonal system itself.
*

*

*

What we refer to as high-level motives received theoretical formulation in the brief but fruitfulperiod duringwhich the ten issues of Der
Tonwille and the first and second volumes of Das Meisterwerkin der
Musik were published (1921-1926). At this time the term "motive"
still had meaning for Schenker, probablybecause his study of melodic
fluencyrevealed a palpable connection between the "motifs"(his term
in Harmony) of the surface and foreground and the figures of deeper
levels. But his "Urliniemotives" and "motives of the first and second
order," which developed duringthe 1920's, are different from the motives that he describes in Harmony (1906). In the later usage, Schenker means the melodically fluent, guiding lines that bind the surface
and foreground to the more determinate Urlinie itself: simple and
often undifferentiated lines, formations such as linear progressions
and neighboring-tonefigures that establish certain parametersat high
structurallevels.10
It is not necessary to embrace the extreme position toward the role
of motive in music that Schenker expresses in Free Composition. "Motive" is a useful term, as long as one understandsthat, like the term
"harmony,"it denotes a thoroughly hierarchicalaspect of tonal structures; as Schenker came to realize in the 1920's, motives unfold at all
levels below the background. In the final section of this study we further illustratethis point and examine the role of high-level motives (of
the first- and second-order) in the exposition and development sections of Mozart'sA-minor Piano Sonata, K. 310.11 Whereas Schenker,
however, was concerned primarilywith the motivic physiognomy of a
specific piece, we are here considering high-level motives in a more
general sense, as the "basicmotives" of the tonal system-figures that
recur at middlegroundlevels and regulate the development of lowerlevel motives in contrasting passages and sections throughout the
135

tonal system. This perspective, we believe, can yield broader insights
about the motivic properties of tonal music.
*

*

*

The arpeggiated descending fifth (E-C-A) in the opening bar of
Mozart's A minor Piano Sonata is a well-known feature of the piece;
in fact this motive is a feature of design at the surface and foreground
in many of Mozart's works. More important for this discussion,
however, is that the significanceof the melodic fifth from E to A extends into the middlegroundof the initial tonic area. In sonata movements in which the first part of the exposition is melodically and
harmonicallyclosed, a version of the fundamental line naturally unfolds as part of a lower-level Ursatz parallelism.
As example 8 illustrates,the firstphrase appearsto initiate this very
process. The upper voice, however, descends only to 2, closure does
not occur (the harmonic and melodic progressions are interrupted),
and the consequent phrase quicklybecomes the modulatorytransition
that establishes the mediant scale step. Thus the tonic area is not literally described by a complete fifth-progression.Schenker, however,
referred to the first branch of an interruption(in a 3-line) not only as
a fourth-progressionbut, more characteristically,as an "unfulfilled"
fifth-progression.Thus we may conceptually represent the tonic region of the exposition by an Urlinieparallelism, a version of the fifth
from E to A, which is both an individualfeature of design and a general construct-a high-level motive-that shapes the contexts for the
unfolding of lower-level motives throughout the tonal literature.
We now turn to the second tonal area (excluding the closing section), an overview of which is presented in example 9. The main point
here is that another fifth-progression, a "first-order"middleground
line from G to C, describes the upper voice from bars 22 to 45. A descent from natural 4 to 3 in the mediant region can be elaborated in
general terms (like the middlegroundfifth of the tonic area) as a recurringfeature of minor-mode tonality. That is, this line is an element
of tonal grammar,one of a few contrapuntal(melodic) archetypesthat
arise from Auskomponierung,in this case, from the composing-out of
the mediant scale step.
In the minor mode, the bass arpeggiationfrom I to III frequently
supportsS-4-3 of a fundamentalline (example 10). The resultingoctave (3 over III) between the backgroundouter voices, however, can
present compositionalproblems at lower levels, because without elaboration this structuraloctave can produce closure and thus inhibit the
composing-out of the mediant. Thus a lower-level version of a fundamental line is often applied to the new scale step so that musical con136

A

5

I

~~I

6
s

mg
4th

7

/, ,.J

unfulfilled
5th.prg.

i

L
I

,

.
V

I

Example 8. Mozart: Piano Sonata in A minor, K. 31

A

5

G
-F

10

?

?--

j J,
5

1

10

10

10

E)

(F

(P)

~N

J^ ^_^,100
7

6

6

7
(P)
10

16
10

(6)
I
10

A

?

A

10

a

,,

j,j^^u.

L
C: I

V

I
A: 111

Example 9. Mozart: K. 310/I; mm. 22-45 (second theme)

tent may unfold before a structural5 is achieved.12As example 10
shows, the local descent from S to I in the key of C major elaborates
the background5-4-5 in A minor, creating the musical (and motivic)
content of the second tonal area.13This is the general tonal explana138

III

III

Example 10. Mozart: K. 310/I; middlegroundgraph of mm. 1-45

tion. We may also consider the fifth-progressionas a high-level motivic archetype, a pattern similar to the fifth from the first tonal area,
that establishes different conditions and thus different possibilities for
lower-level motives in the tonal environment of the mediant.
Example 9 shows that the descent from G to C is initially forestalled. Mozart twice leads his line from G to E (bars 22-31) as motions into an inner voice, before the main line at this level descends
from f2 toward closure in bars 33-45 (the approach to the cadence is
repeated; rhythm and register confirm closure, I in C major, only in
bar 45). Thus, as example 10 summarizes,the fifth-progressionof the
mediant key area is articulated so that the tone succession G-F-E
emerges as a second-ordermotive, defined as such through repetition
and the contrapuntalsupportof the bass (note the parallel lOths);this
motive is a possibility realized from the conditions established by the
recomposition in the mediant of the germinal descending fifth. This
perspective provides a way of relating the contrastinglower-level motives of the firstand second tonal areas. Furthermore,we shall see that
the third-motiverecurs again at a deeper level, holding a different set
of possibilities for the lower levels of the development section.
The large-scale tonal plan of the development section is rathertypical insofar as it reflects another recurringfeature of minor-mode tonality in sonata movements: the section begins in the mediant and
progressesthroughthe subdominantto the structuraldominant, which
is composed out as a retransition.The significantissue, of course, con139

cerns the linear pattern that unfolds at a deep middlegroundlevel in
the tonal space from III to V (example 11).
The development begins with a restatement of the first theme, now
in C major, with G as the main tone in the upper voice. A sequential
passage follows, supporting motivic activity that belongs initially, as
the disposition of register indicates, to the inner voices of the prolonged mediant region. The sequence gradually reestablishes the
upper register, and its conclusion articulates the arrival of the subdominant and highlights a deeper linear connection: G has moved to
F as the main tone in the upper voice. From that point, F is prolonged
by a chromaticvoice exchange that expands the subdominant,producing the characteristicD$-E figure at the end of the subdominantregion. E is finally achieved in the upper voice with the arrival of the
structuraldominant, completing the line G-F-E, which unfolds over
the structuralprogression from 3, at the beginning of the development, to 2, at its conclusion.14
The motivic fabric of the development section, therefore, is governed by the high-level motive G-F-E, which also shaped the lower
levels in the mediant area of the exposition. Examining the motivic
design of the middleground has revealed a deeply unifying relationship between the exposition and the development sections, an association that far transcends customary notions of surface and
foreground motivic development.
*

*

*

Our analysis of Mozart's piano sonata has highlighted some of the
general figuresconstituting a rarefied and limited class of motives, residing on higher planes, that communicate the determined course of
the Urlinieto the lower levels. We can now usefully regardmotives as
theoreticalconstructs as well as compositional elements of design in
specific pieces.15The latter is the customarydescription, involving issues such as Art, the compositional process, and the imagination of
the composer. On the other hand, high-level motives are, as Schenker
might have put it, provided by the system: they are the general linear
patterns that characterize middleground levels throughout the tonal
literature, the "basic motives" of the tonal system.16
This distinction provides a point of departure for examining motivic structure from a unique perspective. In our discussion of the
Mozart sonata, we alluded to its contrasting lower-level motives as
possibilities defined by similar high-level motives in different harmonic contexts. Consider now that lower-level motives in general (in
all tonal pieces) are possibilities realized from the vast array of diminutions permitted by the grammarof the tonal language. The conditions that constrain the possibilities are represented contrapuntallyat
140

III

IV

Example 11. Mozart: K. 310/1; graph of development section, mm. 50-79

deep levels by high-level motives; in other words, they establish certain parametersand limit the motives that unfold at lower levels from
the vast number of theoretically possible formations. Since high-level
motives are a class of figures that recur throughout the tonal literature, it is conceivable that general principles of motivic structurecan
be revealed by examiningthe ways in which they relate to and interact
with the compositional motives of lower levels.
The idea of "realized possibilities" is not foreign to Schenker's
thinking. In his later writings he frequently refers to the "seed and
harvest," which, of course, is a metaphor that alludes to constraint
and possibility.17 The seed is a prototype that encapsulates the
biological conditions for the possibilities that are manifested in the
harvest. Similarly,we view high-level motives as archetypes,which underlie all complex lower-level diminutions and appear in their most
fundamentalforms at deep levels. They encapsulate information-the
harmonic-contrapuntal
possibilities realized at lower levels as specific
motives, motives in the compositional sense.
High-level motives by themselves, however, are almost too general
to serve as practicalconstructs. In the Mozart sonata, for example, we
saw that the third-progression G-F-E occurred in contrasting harmonic environments, in the mediant area of the exposition and in the
development section, and thus defined two contrasting motivic networks. To reveal and quantify their latent possibilities, to see what
conditions they exemplify, one must evaluate and compare high-level
motives in the basic harmonic contexts of triadic unfolding in which
they occur. In conclusion we explore briefly the applicationof a highlevel motive as a theoretical construct-as a motivic archetypethat establishes parameters and signifies possibilities.
Example 12 represents the harmonic environment of the development section schematicallyas a chord progression, with the high-level
motive as its upper voice. This middleground "harmonization"illustrates symbolicallythe arrayof pitch and intervallicrelationshipsthat
define the conditions (possibilities) for the unfolding of lower-level
motives (note that these motives, at least initially, arise from the
working out of the inner voices). 18 In other words, the conditions for
the unfolding of motives at lower levels in the development section
can be determined from the conjunction of the high-level motive and
the scale-step progressionfrom III to V. As can be seen by comparing
examples 10 and 12, the lower-level motives of the development section arise from conditions very different from those in the mediant
area of the exposition, where the same figureproduces a different network of tonal relationships. This last observation continues to clarify
why Schenker came to distrust surface motivic connections. Compositions are not based on contrasting surface "themes"or "melodies,"
142

sion alone. In other words, the inner voices in this theoretical scheme
are assumed to be lower-rankingthan the "soprano," and represent
the source of the surface and foreground (compositional) motives of
the development section (examples 12b and 12c).18Hence the conditions for the unfoldingof motives at lower levels are establishedby the
conjunction of the high-level motive and the scale-step progression
from III to V. These conditions, of course, are different from those in
the mediant area of the exposition, where the same figure produces a
different network of relationships. The last observation further clarifies why Schenker came to distrust surface motivic connections.
Compositions are not based on contrasting surface "themes" or
"melodies," but on contrasting tonal networks produced by the unfolding of the tonic triad and unified by high-level motives.19
In closing, we consider again the notion of melodic fluency, which
led Schenker to realize that motives unfold at various levels below the
background, and which leads us to a conclusion about the archetypal
nature of high-level motives: they resemble the elements of strict
counterpoint, the most concise formulation of the essence of melody
in tonal music. For example, the upper neighbor formation, which unfolds at all levels below the backgroundand is common "first-order"
motive at the first level of the middleground, derives from third species; and basic linear progressions, which we saw at different middleground levels in the Mozart example, arise from the passing-tone
motions of second species. These figures, of course, occur at all lower
levels. But so do the ornate diminutions-the products of free
composition-that are not permitted in strict counterpoint. Thus the
physiognomy of the deepest levels of the middleground clearly illuminates the relationship between strict counterpoint and the foundations of motives.20
These observations also shed light on our remarks about the balance of necessity and freedom that creates a regulated tension in tonal
structures.21
The deep levels are those most strictly governed by the
basic shapes of strict counterpoint. By this we do not mean that highlevel motives are independent of the compositional process, only that
they are natural features of the tonal system itself; they certainly interact with compositional design at lower levels. The balance, however, shifts in favor of freedom at the lower levels, the realm of free
composition, where the imagination of the composer fashions the essential linear patterns of the tonal system into motives in the compositional sense. The specific shapes of these motives, to recall
Schenker's words, are determined by the necessity that the voiceleading process be anchored in a fundamental structure. High-level
motives are the agents of the fundamental structure that shape the
course of the surface and foreground; they epitomize the essence of
143

E

F

G

k-~~

J1
E,

.

4 bars

20 bars
a.

9: r -

4

r

V

v

IV

III
III

b.

%..K

t ^

c.

Hy
Cy

r;Prv
I

111

(P)

If

'

C

rf
IV

V

Example 12. Mozart: K. 310/I; development section, mm. 50-74

motives and define the contexts in which more elaborate formations
unfold at lower levels. Thus a more complete examination of their
properties can reveal universal principles of motivic relationshipsprinciplescommunicatedby the determined figuresof deep levels, the
basic motives of the tonal system.
144

NOTES
1. In the mid 1920's,before he completelyabandonedthe term in Free Compothat refersto generalfigures
sition, Schenkerembraceda notion of "motive"
that reside at the deep middleground
levels and shape the developmentof
lower-levelmotives (diminutions).Our intent is to clarifythe stages in this
transformation Schenker's
of
thought.We will describehow he arrivedat this
highlyabstractand hierarchical
conceptionof motive, and then will illustrate
these figuresin analytical
contexts.Becausewe focus only on the complexevolution of Schenker'sideas, we have decided not to surveyhere the motivic
A
of
views with those
conceptsof his contemporaries. comparison Schenker's
of other theoristsbelongsto a futureand more broadlyconceivedstudy.
An earlierversionof this paperwas read at the 1989annualmeetingof the
New PerSociety for MusicTheory as part of a session entitled "Schenker:
spectives." The authors would like to express their gratitudeto Professor
Charles
the
Burkhart, chairof thatsession,andto Hedi Siegelfor theirvaluable
criticism.Translations by the authorsunlesscited.
are
2. The graphin example1 is from Schenker[1935]1979, suppl.:fig.117/1.
3. Example2A is from Schenker[1910, 1922] 1987, 1:96; example 2B is from
Schenker1987, 1:71.
4. See Pastille 1990. Some of that discussion-enough to make comprehensible
the notion of melodicfluency-has been recapitulated
here.
5. See also Burkhart1978, 145-175.
6. The sketchesin example3A and3B are fromSchenker
[1920]1972,35, 37-38.
7. Examples5 and 6 are from Schenker1924, 3, 8, and Anhang.
8. All of Schenker's
analysesin the firsttwo volumesof Das Meisterwerk
(19251926) share with his study of the Largo the same notions of layeredmotivic
development.We have chosen to focus on this analysisbecauseSchenkerintroduceshis new motivicideashere andbecausehe explicitlyidentifies mothe
tivesof different
structural
levels as "first-order,"
and
"second-order," so forth.
9. See Schenker[1935]1979, 93-106, for an extendeddiscussionof diminution,
whichcan be considered finalthoughtson matterspertaining whatis conhis
to
Schenkerdescribesthe specificcharventionallytermed "motivicstructure."
acteristics the firstlevel of the middleground,
of
some of whichhe refersto as
"first-order"
on
characteristics, pp. 29-52.
10. Sylvan Kalib describesSchenker'slater usage of "motive"as follows: "[In
Schenker'sessay on Bach's Largo] we encounterthe term 'motive' in the
uniqueway Schenkeruses it: a successionof tones whichis formedfrom the
Suchmotivesoccurin the variousstagesof
specificprocessesof the diminution.
voice leadingor diminution.Hence there are motives of the first or highest
order . . . i.e., motivesof closest structural
in
to
significance relationship the
ursatz[sic]; motivesof the second order ... etc. Note the great contrastbetween this conceptionof the term 'motive'as opposedto its conventional
use,
referringsolely to motives in termsof the foreground,i.e., to successionsof
successivenotes only." See Kalib 1973, 3:29.
immediately
11. For otherstudiesthat examinethe firstmovementof K.310, see David Beach,
"The First Movementof Mozart'sPiano Sonata in A Minor, K.310: Some
Thoughts on Structure and Performance," The Journal of Musicological Re-

145

search (1987):157-186;John Rothgeb discussesthe developmentsection in
in
"Designas a Key to Structure Tonal Music,"Journalof Music Theory15
in
Anal(1971):230-253; reprinted MauryYeston, ed., Readingsin Schenker
ysis and Other
Approaches
(New Haven, 1977),72-93; OswaldJonasalso deals
with the development section in Introduction to the Theory of Heinrich Schen-

ker,transanded. JohnRothgeb,(New YorkandLondon,1982),103-104. The
authorsare awareof certainsimilarities
between the analysispresentedhere
andthe studiesjustcited (primarily
the
regarding development
section),though
our interpretation conceivedindependently those analyses; do, howwas
of
we
the
on
ever, gratefully
acknowledge influenceof CarlSchachter our conception
of this piece.
We also point out that Schenker(1922)examinesMozart'sA-MinorPiano
detail. His analysis,however, is in spiritand
Sonata, K. 310, in considerable
contentcloserto the Beethovenop. 101Erlauterungsausgabe
(1920)thanto the
moresophisticated
analysespresentedin the firstand secondvolumesof Meisterwerk
(1925and 1926).Althoughone can detect instancesof what Schenker
wouldcall Urliniemotivesin his analysisof K. 310, the absenceof a stratified
melodicdimension,or delineatedstructural
levels, evincesan earlierstage of
Schenker's
was
thought.The analysisdoes not indicatethat Schenker awareof
differentlevels of motivicactivity,as he certainlywas in his analysisof Bach's
Largo(1925). The analysisof K. 310 in the presentstudyreflectsthe more advancedanalytical
and
techniquefoundin the analysesof Das Meisterwerk Free
Composition.

12. Schenkerdescribesthis aspect of tonal grammar the "transference the
as
of
formsof the fundamental
structure individual
to
harmonies"
(Schenker[1935]
1979, 87-88). Ursatzand Urlinieforms, of course, are tonal archetypes.We
considerthe Urlinie
formsat the firstlevel of the middleground belowto be
and
inherentlymotivic;they are high-levelmotives.
13. This is a controversial
passagein Mozart'sfamoussonata,involvingtwo plausiblereadings.The issueconcernswhetherstructural (d2)appears the tran4
in
sition section (mm. 9-22) or in the line that describesthe second tonal group
revealsa line
(the mediantregion).Althoughthe voice leadingunquestionably
E-D-C in mm. 1-23, example10 showsthatwe regardthis line as motioninto
an inner voice: d2 leads to c2 in bar 23, but both are revealedas inner-voice
tones becaused2 "reachesover" to the g2 that begins the second theme; the
that e2 is still activeas the primary
tone
higherregisteris regained,suggesting
tone
5. The motionfromhigh G then passesthrough(and recalls)the primary
S before4 and3 of the fundamental appearjust beforethe closingsection.
line
14. A structural
outline of mm. 70-78 of this developmentsection is providedin
EdwardAldwell and Carl Schachter1989, 489.
15. See Cadwallader
of
motive. Although
1988, 1-35, for a discussion a first-order
writtenfirst,that studyactuallyrepresentsthe logicalnext stage of the examinationof Schenker's
ideas that we are outliningin the presentessay.
16. The point is often raisedthat a tone successionshouldrecur,at the same level
or acrossdifferentlevels, to qualifyas a motive. But we see no reason for a
theoretical
that
requirement a tone successionmustunfoldat a surfaceor foregroundlevel to be grantedthe statusof a motiveat a higherlevel. For example,
one can easilyimaginea neighbor-note
figure,a motiveby any definition,that
146

unfolds only at the first level of the middleground. The phenomenon of expanded repetition shows that deep figures can be motives. Why not, then, extend this reasoning and accept all deep linear patterns as inherently motivic,
regardless of whether they characterize multiple levels? Like concealed motivic
repetitions, reflections of high-level motives may appear at different levels, but
they do not have to: this is one distinction between a theoretical and compositional notion of motive. In any case, high-level motives do satisfy this condition in a broader sense-they recur across different pieces.
17. See for instance, Schenker's discussion of J. S. Bach's Little Prelude in E
minor, BMV 941, in which he points out a rising third-progression (E-F#-G)
that he refers to as the "seed" (Aussaat) that determines the subsequent "harvest" (Ernte); that is, this general figure, which unfolds at the surface and deep
middleground levels, is the basis for most of the diminution in the composition
(Schenker 1925, 109-110).
18. We have not attempted in this brief exposition to address every question raised
by this approach. For example, surface and foreground motives do not always
unfold "below" higher-ranking tones; and registrally superior, high-level motives may include, but are subordinate to, the tones of the Urlinie. Consequently, the relationship between register, lower-level motives, and the "inner
voices" of a tonal network must be developed as an issue in its own right in
future studies.
19. One should also consider rhythm in describing the properties of high-level motives. The figure G-F-E is a high-level motive precisely because its tones are
high-ranking. The tones also embody various degrees of high-ranking durational weight: the G in the example governs 20 bars, the F, four bars. High-level
motives unfold more slowly than motives at lower levels, and their tones often
govern large amounts of tonal space. This observation may seem rather obvious, but it continues to distinguish the relationships of the network. The rhythmic properties of a middleground motive can be described through the
foreground span it embraces and the distance between its tones, indicating how
fully the motivic possibilities of the network are worked out.
20. Motives and motivic relationships, of course, are not aspects of strict counterpoint. Our point is that the basic shapes of high-level motives are codified in the
five species of counterpoint.
21. Schenker always considered the balance of necessity and freedom to be a hallmark of the creative artist. In 1924, for example, he writes (after Schiller), "But
only when both combine-when the will freely complies with the laws of necessity and when the reason, notwithstanding all of the fluctuations of the imagination, maintains its rule-only then does the divine or the ideal emerge"
(Schenker 1924, 3). This dialectic is put into sharper focus when one defines one
of its aspects-necessity-in
terms of the laws of tonality, of which high-level
motives are manifestations.

LIST OF WORKS CITED
(Schenker's Works are listed in chronological order of the original
German editions)
Aldwell, Edward, and Carl Schachter. 1989. Harmony and Voice Leading. 2d ed.
San Diego: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich.

147

Burkhart, Charles. 1978. "Schenker's 'Motivic Parallelisms'." Journal of Music
Theory 22: 145-175.
Cadwallader, Allen. 1988. "Prolegomena to a General Description of Motivic Relationships in Tonal Music." Integral 2: 1-35.
Kalib, Sylvan. 1973. "Thirteen Essays from the Three Yearbooks Das Meisterwerk
in der Musik by Heinrich Schenker: An Annotated Translation." Ph.D. diss.,
Northwestern University.
Pastille, William. 1990. "The Development of the Ursatz in Schenker's Published
Writings." In Trends in Schenkerian Research, edited by Allen Cadwallader,
71-85. New York: Schirmer Books.
Schenker, Heinrich. [1906] 1954. Harmony. Trans. Elisabeth Mann Borgese; ed.
Oswald Jonas. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
--[1909, rev. ed. 1970] 1984. J. S. Bach's Chromatic Fantasy and Fugue.
Trans. and ed. Hedi Siegel. New York: Longman.
[1910, 1922] 1987. Counterpoint. 2 vols. Trans. John Rothgeb and Jurgen
Thym; ed. John Rothgeb. New York: Schirmer Books.
[1920] 1972. Erliiuterungsausgabender letzten fiinf Sonaten Beethovens: Op.
101. Rev. ed., ed. Oswald Jonas. Vienna: Universal Edition.
1921. "Joh. Seb. Bach: Wohltemperiertes Klavier, Band 1, Praludium EsMoll." Der Tonwille 1: 38-45.
1922. "Mozart: Sonate A-Moll." Der Tonwille 2: 7-24.
1924. "Brahms: Variationen und Fuge uber ein Thema von Handel, Op.
24." Der Tonwille 8/9: 3-46.
[1925] 1976. "The Largo of J. S. Bach's Sonata No. 3 for Unaccompanied
Violin [BMV 1005]." Trans. John Rothgeb. The Music Forum 4: 141-159.
1925. "J. S. Bach: Zwolf kleine Praludien, Nr. 7." Das Meisterwerk in der
musik 1:107-113.
[1935] 1979. Free Composition. Trans. and ed. Ernst Oster. New York:
Schirmer Books.

148

