The Early Reception of Neapolitan
Partimento Theory in France
A Survey

Rosa Cafiero

Abstract  The tradition of the Neapolitan school of composition (in which the partimento and its teaching techniques played a significant role) had a major influence on musical training in Paris from the second half of the
eighteenth century through the first half of the nineteenth century. This article focuses first on some significant
witnesses of this era (Fedele Fenaroli and Emanuele Imbimbo, who followed the school of Francesco Durante) and
then on an interpretation of the traditionally nonverbal rules of partimenti proposed by François-Joseph Fétis.

Harmonist: A musician with a deep knowledge of harmony. He’s a good Harmonist.
Durante is the best Harmonist in Italy, that is, in the World.
—Rousseau, Dictionnaire de musique, 1768

Neapolitan school or Neapolitan schools?
Some preliminary thoughts

a number of historiographic myths concerning the rise and “flowering” of
the Neapolitan school of composition in the eighteenth century have grown
up following two parallel traditions, the first descending from the educational
methods of Francesco Durante (1684–1755) and mostly characterized by “simplicity,” and the second descending from the teaching heritage of Leonardo
Leo (1694–1744) and mainly inspired by “complexity.” In his monumental history of the Neapolitan school, Francesco Florimo (1882) tells us how the followers of the two masters (the Durantisti and the Leisti) disagreed profoundly
as far as teaching methods were concerned:
The Leisti took great pains with chordal richness, harmonic progression, voice
leading, contrapuntal invention, in sum, with artfulness and skill rather than
with spontaneity. By contrast the Durantisti focused mainly on melody, on clear
voice leading, on easy modulations, on harmonic elegance and on effect,
intended as the most proper means to create music to please, rather than to

Journal of Music Theory  51:1, Spring 2007
DOI 10.1215/00222909-2008-025  © 2009 by Yale University

137

138

J ournal o f M usi c T heory

surprise. The latter method, which triumphed over the former, has given fame
to the Neapolitan school.1

By the 1770s the Durantist tradition progressively began to outshine the
Leist one. This became true even in France, as supported by witnesses like
Jean-Jacques Rousseau (1768, 243) and, later, André-Modest Grétry (1789,
1:81–​ 3, 118).2 At the beginning of the nineteenth century, this preeminent
8
position was confirmed by Alexandre-Étienne Choron, who published the
opus classicum of Italian keyboard accompaniment methods, the Principes
d’accompagnement des Ecoles d’Italie (Choron and Fiocchi 1804). This was based
primarily on the Regole musicali per i principianti di cembalo (Christensen 1992,
112; Cafiero 2001a),3 printed in Naples by Fedele Fenaroli (1775), who had
studied with Durante.
Around 1806, when the unified Royal College of Music (located in the
monastery of San Sebastiano) was founded by King Joseph Bonaparte (Napoleon’s brother) from the ashes of the two surviving conservatories (Pietà dei
Turchini and Loreto a Capuana),4 an attempt to revive the eighteenth-century
tradition and to establish a new balance between the two schools was made.
All teachers of composition and of partimenti—by that time intended as the
basic introduction to harmonic accompaniment—were invited to deposit
in the college library a copy of their manuscript lesson books, in order to
allow students to study directly from firsthand sources. Dozens of manuscripts
(both autographs and copies) were collected, integrating the huge collection that Giuseppe Sigismondo5 and Saverio Mattei had already gathered at
the Pietà dei Turchini archive (see Indice 1801). The name of Carlo Cotumacci, a pupil of Alessandro Scarlatti (and, according to Francesco Florimo,

1  The platitude of equating Durante with simplicity and
Leo with complexity was traditionally fixed by Florimo,
who widely emphasized the preeminence of the Duran­
tisti (among whom he numbered himself, as a classmate
of Vincenzo Bellini) against the Leisti (Florimo 1882, 81):
“I Leisti tenevano alla ricchezza degli accordi, alle combi­
nazioni armoniche, agl’intrecci delle parti, alle contronote,
in una parola più all’artificio ed al magistero che alla sponta­
neità. I Durantisti al contrario miravano, come a scopo prin­
cipale, alla melodia, alla chiara disposizione delle voci, alle
facili modulazioni, all’eleganza delle armonie ed all’effetto,
come i mezzi più adatti a comporre musica che dilettasse
più che sorprendesse. Quest’ultimo sistema, ch’è quello
che ha trionfato, ha reso celebre la scuola napolitana. On
”
the ­ urantisti–Leisti controversies, see Hansell 1968, esp.
D
238–40.
2  “Let us assume that Italian compositions are somehow
rude and less varied, depending on the fact that compos­
ers have forgotten harmony. This queen of music is wholly
neglected even by Durante’s pupils, who knew harmony at a
very high level” (“Convenons ensuite qu’il ya a de la séche­

resse et peu de variété dans les compositions italiennes;
ce défaut provient encore de l’oubli de l’harmonie. Cette
reine de la musique est trop négligée par les élèves même
de Durante, qui la possédoit à un si haut degré”; Grétry
1789, 1:118).
3  An English translation of Fenaroli’s rules is available in
Gjerdingen 2005. See also Gjerdingen 2007
.
4  The conservatory of Santa Maria di Loreto a Capuana was
formed in 1797 when the remaining pupils at the conserva­
tory of Santa Maria di Loreto joined those who studied at
the conservatory of Sant’Onofrio a Capuana; the students
of the former moved to the building of the latter. See Di
Giacomo (1928, 215–17) and Cafiero (2005a, 23–27).
5  The presence of Sigismondo, a deus ex machina in the
reconstruction of the Neapolitan school of composition, at
the conservatory archive is described in correspondence on
the state of music in Naples for the Allgemeine musikal­
ische Zeitung by Franz Sales Kandler (1821). See Libby 1988
and Cafiero 1993b.

Rosa Cafiero 

  Partimento Theory in France

139

a second-­ eneration pupil of Durante, as well),6 whose role and presence
g
in Sant’Onofrio a Capuana had been described in 1770 by Charles Burney
(1771, 346–47), can definitely be associated with the traditions of both Durante
(whom he suc­ eeded in 1755 and from whom his methods widely derive) and
c
Leo. As this and other cases demonstrate, the Neapolitan theoretical environment was thus characterized by a plurality of teaching methods and preferences. The genealogies of teachers and pupils as sketched in the second half
of the nineteenth century by Francesco Florimo (1882, 30), the first historian
to attempt a full reconstruction of the Neapolitan schools and traditions, and
in the first half of the twentieth century by Salvatore Di Giacomo (1924, 136;
1928)7 actually show a highly complex map of filiations that may not fit into
a simple dichotomy.
Evidence of Neapolitan teaching traditions in Paris begins to accumulate in the second half of the eighteenth century. A number of treatises are
published by Biferi (1770), Francesco Azzopardi (1786), Honoré-FrançoisMarie Langlé (1797, 1798, 1801; self-described “ancien premier Maître” at the
Pietà dei Turchini; listed as Italian in Pierre 1900, 44), and Florido Tomeoni
(1798, 1800). A sort of osmotic process gets under way in Paris, both to obtain
information about Italian teaching methods and, in turn, to disseminate this
didactic paradigm through the volumes projected for the new Conservatoire
(Cafiero 1999, 425–81). As part of this process, Emanuele Imbimbo, a pupil of
Sigismondo, prints two Parisian editions of partimenti by Fenaroli (Fenaroli
and Imbimbo 1814a, 1814b).
Choron subsequently adds further documentation for a Parisian reconstruction of the Neapolitan schools of composition. In 1808 he publishes the
Principes de Composition des écoles d’Italie, and in 1810 the Dictionnaire historique
des musiciens with François Fayolle,8 which was then translated a couple of years
later into Italian by Giuseppe Bertini (1814–15).
A huge amount of Neapolitan theoretical sources have survived thanks
to collectors such as Gaspare Selvaggi9 (whose collection was sold to the Paris

6  “After Durante’s death in 1755, Carlo Contumacci, who
was a former associate of Durante, was named first mas­
ter” (Sigismondo 1820, 2:114–15); see Cafiero 1993a and
2005b.
7  Di Giacomo conducted detailed archival research; see
also Cafiero 1993a, 1999.
8  “It is in the school of Naples, and particularly in that of
DURANTE, that it [tonality] was fixed in all its relationships,
at least with regard to practice; for with regard to theory, it is
still quite incomplete” (“C’est dans l’école de Naples, et par­
ticulièrement dans celle de DURANTE, qu’elle [la tonalité] a
été fixé sous tous les rapports, du moins en ce qui concerne
la pratique: car, en ce qui concerne la théorie, elle est encore
très imparfaite”; Choron and Fayolle 1810, xxxviii).

9  Selvaggi 1823; see Cafiero 2001a. For further references
to French theorists, see Napoli-Signorelli 1847 esp. 86–96.
,
For further references to Selvaggi, see Sanguinetti 1999,
esp. 148–56; and Sanguinetti 2005.

140

J ournal o f M usi c T heory

Conservatory10 and to the British Library; see Hughes-Hughes (1906–9) and
the already mentioned Sigismondo (whose volumes make up a consistent
corpus at the Conservatorio San Pietro a Majella in Naples; Cafiero 1993b).
Sigismondo helped to fix the basis for a local historiography of the Neapolitan
school of composition. His monograph Apoteosi della musica11 (1820; now in the
Berlin Staatsbibliothek) was widely used by Carlo Antonio De Rosa, marquis of
Villarosa, in the Memorie dei compositori di musica del Regno di Napoli (1840) and
gave rise to a significant amount of information used ever since by historians.
Sigismondo’s collection was assembled over about thirty years and includes a
considerable number of theoretical texts (collections of partimenti, fugues,
and several textbooks or anthologies—of various content and purpose—often
copied by Sigismondo himself), whose histories and genealogies still need to
be investigated.12
Though the complexities in Naples of four conservatories, dozens of
important teachers, and hundreds of student musicians have yet to be fully
unraveled, a simplified version of the Neapolitan school appears to have been
transmitted to France. That is the focus of this essay.
The Durantist tradition between Naples and Paris: An overview

The partimento, originally conceived as an artistic improvisatory instrumental form (Kunstform, Fellerer 1939) more than as a means of harmonic (and
contrapuntal) training in accompaniment (Schulform, Fellerer 1939), helps us
to define a particular mode of transmission for the harmonic rules as established in the Neapolitan tradition. The case of Fedele Fenaroli’s rules (and
exercises) for harpsichord beginners (per i principianti di cembalo), first printed
in Naples in 1775, is almost unique, since they survived for more than a century (from the second half of the eighteenth century to the 1880s) through
reprints, annotated editions, and dozens of manuscript copies in Italy and

10  See the notice in the Allgemeine musikalische Zeitung,
14/27 (July 1, 1812), cols. 448–49:
Durantes Compositionen sind ziemlich selten. Das
pariser Conservatorium ist im Besitz einer schönen
Sammlung derselben, welche es der Gefälligkeit des
Neapolitaners Selvaggi verdankt. Dieser Dilettant, der
seit 1797 ungefähr sich in Frankreich niedergelassen
hat, besitzt eine Menge der trefflichsten Originalwerke
italienischer Meister, namentlich eine Sammlung—
wahrscheinlich die vollständigste, die es gibt—der Com­
positionen Palestrina’s und Durante’s. . . . Partimenti
per Cembalo. (Dies sind bezifferte Bässe zur Uebung in
der Begleitung. Diese Partimenti werden in ganz Italien
als classisch angesehen.)
11  On the documentary sources used by Sigismondo
while writing the Apoteosi, see Kandler 1821, no. 50, col.
833:

Durch bedeutende, mit manchem persönlichen Opfer
verbundene Anstrengungen, und mit Zufühlnahme
des wohlerfahrenen 84järigen Archivars, D. Giuseppe
Sigismondo, eines Zeitgenossen und Freundes Pic­
cini’s, Jomelli’s, Caffaro’s und Schülers Porpora’s, ist es
mir gelungen, eine namhafte Menge auf jene Institute
Bezug habender Notizen und Dokumente zu erhalten,
die seiner Zeit eben so ergiebige als zuverlässige Mate­
rialien für eine ausgeführtere Kunstgeschichte darbieten
warden.
See also Shearon 2000.
12  Abbate (2007) points out that a manuscript traditionally
attributed to Sigismondo (Alfabeto musicale, dated 1766) is
a copy of a counterpoint text by Gabellone (or Leo).

Rosa Cafiero 

  Partimento Theory in France

141

France. The presence of Fenaroli as a teacher at the Conservatorio of Santa
Maria di Loreto a Capuana at the time of the unification of the conservatories
(datable, as far as initial projects are concerned, around 1802), his retirement
as a teacher (1806), and his further recruitment as one of the new three directors of the new Royal College of Music (together with the Durantist Giovanni
Paisiello and the Leist Giacomo Tritto; Cafiero 1993a and Dellaborra 2007)
confirm his role as an important institutional and artistic witness with strong
connections to the “Golden Age” of eighteenth-century Naples. His fear of
losing touch with that tradition may have contributed to his fixing the rules as
close as possible to the “original” model.
The picture traced in a rather hagiographic pamphlet published in Naples
soon after Fenaroli’s death, Francesco Maria Avellino’s Praise (due to be read
at the Academy of Fine Arts of the Bourbon Royal Society, which included
among its members only three musicians: Paisiello, Niccolò Zingarelli, and
Fenaroli) gives us a synthetic though detailed overview (Avellino 1818, 15–16,
18–19; see also Grossi 1819, 181):
Let us take into consideration [Fenaroli’s] didactic works, which made him a
meritorious art scholar, emulating the glory and fame of his teacher Durante.
These works are some intavolature, his study of counterpoint, still unpublished,
and the rules of partimenti, already known to the public.
Before Fenaroli, none of the highly reputed masters of our School had
had the fine idea of methodically presenting the rules of keyboard accompaniment and of organizing them into a complete course of style. Content to dictate
them to their students, they made these rules circulate through a kind of tradition, rather than through a regular written text. We can attribute to Fenaroli
the merit to having accomplished such a fine project, and of having achieved it
with great mastery, composing his Musical Rules for Harpsichord Beginners (Regole
musicali per i principianti del cembalo),13 which have been reprinted several times,
equipped with a fine number of examples called partimenti. . . .14
Even from this short survey of Fenaroli’s work everyone can see what sort
of classical and useful work he has achieved. The work was at once welcomed
with general praise. Several copies of Fenaroli’s partimenti soon started to circulate and were used by the most reputed masters as teaching devices. In 1814
the fifth edition15 of Fenaroli’s rules was published in Naples. Even though here

13  The musical rules, as far as we know from Fenaroli him­
self in a letter sent to King Ferdinand IV of Bourbon (1802),
were intended to instruct pupils both in figured playing
(sonare numerico) and in counterpoint. In this letter (Naples,
State Archive, fund Ministry of Internal Affairs, II inventory,
bundle 5182, published and described in Cafiero 1993a,
552), Fenaroli asked the king to appoint him director of all
Neapolitan conservatories, after Niccolò Piccinni’s death.
14  Prior to Giuseppe Girard’s edition, the handwritten figured
partimenti were sold separately from the text of the rules; in
the 1795 reprint of the 1775 edition we read: “We sell these

books in Vincenzo Mazzola-Vocola’s printing house, close to
the Church of the Pietà de’ Torchini at the expense of two
carlini. The book with figured and corrected examples is sold
at the copyists’ shop close to the above-mentioned church”
(Fenaroli 1795, 60).
15  “The booklets are sold at no. 78 Mater Dei Street, third
floor, at the house of Maestro Cesare Jannoni” (Fenaroli
1814, A1).

142

J ournal o f M usi c T heory

in Naples we still do not have any printed partimenti16 (since the practice of
engraving music is still not very popular), a fine edition was printed in Paris by
Mr. Carli.17 We will not forget that the most respected Mr. Choron took profit
of our distinguished professor’s knowledge in France when he published his
principles of harmony and accompaniment for young learners in 1804 [Choron
and Fiocchi 1804], using the famous Neapolitan master’s rules and examples.

The content of Fenaroli’s Musical Rules is further described (Avellino 1818,
17–18):
After fixing in his Musical Rules the general theories of consonances and dissonances, the author deals with the scale, shows how it is built up in both the
major and minor modes, and how it can be harmonized in different chord positions. After giving a clear idea of cadences, he illustrates the rules concerning
dissonances, how to prepare them and how to resolve them. Eventually he
shows bass movements with their proper accompaniments. All rules, easy and
clear, are illustrated through examples included in the partimenti, which show
their practical realization.
The author has divided his useful and well-read series of examples into
six books. The first one (as he states in an autograph manuscript I have right
under my eyes) includes scales and cadences, followed by lessons on scales in all
major and minor keys, not by examples of dissonances, as it wrongly occurs in
some copies. The second book includes examples of dissonances followed by
the respective lessons, numbered according to their progressive difficulty. The
third book includes the rules of bass movements and is the last one which offers
graded examples corresponding to the printed rules. In the fourth book the
students still have to practice all the rules and to find the right accompaniments for all the unfigured partimenti included. Eventually the fifth18 and sixth
books (which close the partimenti), include diatonic and chromatic fugues
(fughe naturali, e cromatiche), canons, and basses for imitation (bassi ­mitati).
i

In the introduction (discours préliminaire) to his 1814 Parisian edition of
Fenaroli’s Partimenti, Imbimbo goes further in informing his readers of his
goal, which is to allow students of harmony to master a synthesis of harmony
and counterpoint, to which the conception of the partimento naturally leads,
in continuity with the “tradition” (Fenaroli and Imbimbo 1814a, VIII):

16  The first Neapolitan edition of partimenti was published
by Giuseppe Girard, who was the official publisher at the
Collegio di musica; he initially printed the first four books of
partimenti (publ. nos. 551, 959, 997 998), later on the fifth
,
and the sixth (nos. 1348 and 1353), presumably between
1826 and 1829. See Girard’s notices in the official Neapoli­
tan newspaper, Giornale del Regno delle Due Sicilie, no.
202, August 31, 1826, and no. 95, April 25, 1829, quoted in
Cafiero and Seller 1989, 69–70. On Girard at the Collegio,
see Kandler 1821, col. 872.
17  The Neapolitan publisher Raffaele Carli, who went to
Paris as a refugee after 1799, had printed two editions
(Fena­ oli and Imbimbo 1814a, 1814b).
r

18  Fenaroli had conceived the fifth book of his partimenti in
January 1811, as we learn from a letter he sent to his former
pupil Marco Santucci (1762–1843): “Ora sto facendo il quinto
libro di partimenti fugati, e soltanto voi che siete della mia
scuola, e che molto capite potete insegnarli” (“I am now
writing the fifth book of fugal partimenti, and only you, who
belong to my school and understand a lot, can teach how to
harmonize them”). The letter, written on January 18, 1811, is
in the library of the Accademia Filarmonica in Bologna; see
Catalogo della collezione d’autografi 1896, 109.

Rosa Cafiero 

  Partimento Theory in France

143

We have decided to bring out the six books of partimenti of Mr. Fenaroli of
Naples, zealous partisan of the school of Durante in which he trained. It is on
these principles, reviewed and augmented by Fenaroli himself, that students
study at the royal conservatory of Naples, not only to learn accompaniment but
also to open the path to the rules of counterpoint. And we publish them, as is
our duty, without any alteration, being the system that distinguishes the Neapolitan School, which has produced so many celebrated composers in Europe,
whose works in all genres will pass to posterity as models of the art and of good
taste, and whose names will never perish, in spite of their detractors.19

Imbimbo traces the main stages of the course (scale, intervals, chords),
reminding his readers that most instructions concerning instrumental performing techniques can be found elsewhere. His goal is to propose the “true
principles” of a coherent musical style:
Nonetheless it seemed indispensable for us to explain certain passages relating
to the scale, to intervals, and to chords, with the goal of expanding and updating the little book of Musical Rules published in Naples, and by the same author
Fenaroli, which leave to the teacher the task of making the fingers negotiate
the keys of the harpsichord, because he felt it was unnecessary to treat a subject
where there already exist numerous treatises on the mechanical aspect of playing this instrument. At the same time, we hope that the public would agree with
our intention, which has no goal but the advancement of dedicated pupils, and
the support of an art that, though degenerated in our own day by the mixing
of styles, will rise again, shining and pure, in happier times and following the
true principles.20 (Fenaroli and Imbimbo 1814a, VIII)

The harmonization of the scale is a turning point as far as the application of
the rules is concerned. When Choron and Vincenzo Fiocchi (who assisted
Choron) had to choose among the examples of the “classical” masters of the
Italian schools, they chose to quote Durante as the highest authority (see
Example 1).
Imbimbo proposes two examples to illustrate the ascending and descending major and minor scales (see Examples 2 and 3). As far as the fifth degree

19  “Nous nous sommes proposé de mettre au jour les
six livres des Partimenti de M.r Fenaroli Napolitain, zélé
partisan de l’école de Durante d’où il est sorti. C’est sur
ces principes revûs et augmentés par lui même que
s’exercerent les élèves du conservatoire royal de Naples,
non seulement pour apprendre l’accompagnement, mais
encore pour s’ouvrir la route aux règles du contrepoint;
et nous les publions, comme il est de notre devoir, sans
aucune altération, et comme étant le système par où s’est
distinguée l’école napolitaine, qui a produit en Europe tant
de célèbres compositeurs, dont les ouvrages en tout genre
passeront à la posterité comme des modèles de l’art et du
bon goût, et dont les noms ne périront jamais, en dépit de
leurs détracteurs.
”

20  “Cependant, il nous a paru indispensable d’expliquer
quelques passages relativement à l’echelle, aux intervalles,
et aux accords, afin de répandre plus de jour sur le petit
livre des Règles musicales imprimé à Naples, et du même
auteur Fenaroli, laissant aux professeur le soin de faire par­
courir avec les doigts les touches du clavecin, puis qu’il nous
a paru inutile d’en parler, attendu qu’il existe assez de traités
sur la partie mécanique de l’éxécution de cet instrument.
Nous espérons en même tems que le public voudra bien
agréer notre intention qui n’a pour but que l’avancement des
élèves studieux, et le soutien d’un art qui, quoique dégé­
nérée de nos jours par le mélange des styles, se relevera
brillant et pur dans des temps plus hereux, en suivant les
vrais principes.
”

144

J ournal o f M usi c T heory

Example 1.  Exercise on the règle de l’octave (Choron and Fiocchi 1804, 7)

is concerned in the ascending scale, Imbimbo proposes to harmonize it with
tonic rather than dominant harmony (the Neapolitan norm) and points out
that there is a querelle concerning the authentic “version”21 (Fenaroli and
Imbimbo 1814a, 19). No further evidence of what Imbimbo describes as a controversy yet to be “decided authentically” can be found in his textbooks (nor
in Durante’s or Fenaroli’s). An indication of the basse fondamentale is given as
well, most likely with the intention of translating the empirical Neapolitan
rules into the language of Jean-Philippe Rameau and perhaps catching the
attention (and indulgence) of a French, Rameau-oriented reader.
A coherent style should maintain “clarity” (clarté) and “simplicity” (simplicité), avoiding bizarre and awkward (“barbarous”) modulations, taking care
21  “Dans cette première échelle la corde fondamentale de
la Cinquième montante du ton est le Do (a) base de l’accord
parfait, composé de I.e 3.e et 5.e, et qui dans le renverse­
ment des parties vers l’aigu se change en 4.e et 6.e sur la
corde Sol (b) de la basse continue. Ce principe a fait naitre

la question de savoir si la Cinquième montante du ton doit
s’accompagner de la 3.e et 5.e, ou de la 4.e et 6.e, ce qui n’a
pas encore été décidé authentiquement. Letter (a) refers
”
to the fundamental-bass staff; letter (b) refers to the thor­
oughbass staff.

Rosa Cafiero 

  Partimento Theory in France

Example 2.  The major scale in ascending and descending motion (Fenaroli and Imbimbo
1814a, 19)

Example 3.  The minor scale in ascending and descending motion (Fenaroli and Imbimbo
1814a, 19)

of melody and a unity of thought (Fenaroli and Imbimbo 1814a, VIII–IX;
Imbimbo may be echoing Rousseau’s concept of unité de mélodie; Rousseau
1768, 536–39):
To those who profess it, however, we continue to strongly advise that they preserve in their compositions the clarity and simplicity of the Neapolitan School,
and that they distance themselves entirely from these instrumental harmonic
modulations that are nothing but bizarre, braying, and often barbarous, and
which are so glorified today to the great harm and detriment of melody, because
too many simultaneous sensations produce confusion, giving neither pleasure
nor any precise idea of what one hears, whence it comes about that the mind,
agitated, tormented, tired of not understanding anything, becomes bored without enjoyment. An overly complicated music becomes lost in the labyrinth of
the ear. A true music is that which penetrates the recesses of the heart, seat of
all the passions. In a composer, varying the mode and rhythm needlessly, creating strange chords, forcing oneself ultimately to produce a harmony without a
unity of ideas, proves an absence of genius. Only two inspired notes played well

145

146

J ournal o f M usi c T heory

suffice to produce a grand effect, and it is in this that consists the sublime of
the art.22

In his introduction to the second volume of Fenaroli’s Partimenti,
Imbimbo illustrates how a partimento can become a basso fugato, being realized according to contrapuntal principles (Fenaroli and Imbimbo 1814b, I):
In the school of music established in Naples, among the exercises given to students who have made some progress in partimenti and counterpoint, is the
Basso Fugato, where one invents parts from which to compose a multi-voice
fugue. Mr. Fenaroli, being Master at the Royal Conservatory of Santa Maria di
Loreto in Naples, is the first to have given us a collection of bassi fugati in his
partimenti, the purpose being to challenge the students and to facilitate their
becoming distinguished composers some day, like Santucci, Giordaniello,
Zinga­ elli, Cimarosa, etc., etc. Now this method, which is little known or comr
pletely unknown, poses great difficulties for many students. For this reason,
and wishing to smooth the road for those who study music, I have realized in 2,
3, 4, or 5 voices some of these bassi, without changing anything of their layout.
There were some where I permitted myself to explicate a certain passage; and
to make the artifice of a certain composition more comprehensible, I felt that
it was indispensable to add a summary of everything that applies to the practice
of counterpoint and fugue, hoping that, as fruit of my labors, that I would find
more indulgence than severity with the public, and a smile of approval from the
venerable Fenaroli.23

Some more useful details on the students’ training concern the use of the
scale (Fenaroli and Imbimbo 1814b, 16):

22  “Ne cessons pas cependant de bien recommander à ceux
qui le professent de conserver dans leurs compositions la
clarté et la simplicité de l’école napolitaine, et de s’éloigner
entièrement de ces modulations harmoniques instrumen­
tales qui ne sont que bizarres, bruyantes et souvent bar­
bares, et dont on se glorifie tant aujourd’hui, au grand abus
et détriment de la mélodie, puisque plusieurs sensations
simulanées produisant la confusion, ne donnent ni plaisir, ni
aucune idée précise de ce qu’on entend; d’où il arrive que
l’ame agitée, tourmentée, fatiguée de ne rien comprendre,
s’ennuie sans pouvoir jouir. Une musique trop compliquée
se perd dans le labyrinthe de l’oreille. La vraie musique
est celle qui pénétre les voies du coeur siège de toutes
les passions. Varier de mode et de rhytme sans nécessité,
prodiguer les accords, s’enforcer, enfin, de produire une
harmonie sans unité de pensées, prouve dans un composi­
teur l’absence du génie. Deux seules notes d’inspiration et
bien exécutées suffisent pour produire le plus grand effet,
et c’est en quoi consiste le Sublime de l’art.
”
23  “Un des exercises de l’école de musique établie à
Naples est de donner aux jeunes gens qui ont fait des pro­
grès dans les Partimenti et dans le Contrepoint, un Basso

fugato, pour en diviser les parties dont ils composent une
Fugue à plusieurs voix. Mr Fénaroli étant maître du Con­
servatoire royal de S.te Marie de Lorette à Naples, est le
premier qui nous ait laissé dans ses Partimenti une suite de
Bassi fugati, pour y exercer les élèves, et leur faciliter les
moyens de devenir un jour des compositeurs distingués,
tels que M.rs Santucci, Giordaniello, Zingarelli, Cimarosa,
&c. &c. Or, cette méthode étant peu connue ailleurs, ou ne
l’étant point du tout, offre de grandes difficultés à plusieurs
personnes. C’est pourquoi, voulant applanir la route à ceux
qui étudient la musique, j’ai décomposé quelques unes de
ces Bassi en les réduisant en Fugues à 2, à 3, à 4 et à 5 voix,
sans rien charger à leur marche; il y en a aussi quelques
unes dont je me suis permis d’etendre quelque passage;
et pour mieux faire comprendre l’artifice d’une composition
quelconque, j’ai cru qu’il êtoit indispensable d’y ajouter un
abregé de tout ce qui à rapport à la pratique du Contrepoint
et de la Fugue; espérant, pour fruit de mon travail, trouver
dans le public plus d’indulgence que de sévérité, et dans le
respectable Fénaroli un sourire de bienveillance.
”

Rosa Cafiero 

  Partimento Theory in France

147

If a young man wishes to make progress in the rules of partimenti and counterpoint, he will begin by practicing the scale, creating against it melodies of a
single voice, first in note-against-note counterpoint, and then with more
notes—and of different values—per each note of the scale. He will continue his
exercises by placing above the same scale a florid counterpoint of two voices,
first with consonances only, and then with dissonances between them. And he
will do the same thing with three and four voices, not only with brief notes but
also with long ones. He will retain the same scale as a subject, and he will
modulate the other parts along with it, inverting the intervals.24

Eventually, the student will build up a basso fugato (or a ricercare) based
on the partimento, taking care of both contrapuntal and harmonic invention,
without excessive effects (Fenaroli and Imbimbo 1814b, 18):25
A young man wishing to notate in score a basso fugato or a ricercare from partimenti should make use of the clefs designated by the partimento’s author, or
replace those he judges more appropriate. He will notate the subject (proposta)
and answer (risposta) of each part, and if there is a counter subject he will examine it to see where it should be introduced. He will fill in the void of harmony
between the parts, occasionally giving the parts pauses so that they can reenter
with more force. He will carefully observe the notes that bring about a change
of key (mode). He will seek out double counterpoints, canons, inversions, imitations, episodes, and strettos of the fugue. Lastly, in addition to the basso cantante
(the vocal bass notated in the partimento), he ought to invent, if possible, a
basso continuo, simple or complex, that not only serves as an accompaniment,
but also participates with the other parts in the texture of the harmony, to
which that bass will sometimes join the basso cantante or the voice that replaces
it. (Fenaroli and Imbimbo 1814b, 17)26

He recommends that a student follow the ideal models, both in theory and in
practice, which are the Golden Age masters (Fenaroli and Imbimbo 1814b,
18–19): “Nourish yourself by reading the fine writers on both practice and
theory, study carefully the examples that they cite, and above all study Mar-

24  “Quand le jeune homme aura fait des progrès dans les
regles des Partimenti et du Contrepoint il commencera à
s’exercer sur l’échelle, en y créant des chants une voix seule,
d’abord note contre note, et ensuite plusieurs notes—de
valeur différente contre une de la même—mesure. Il con­
tinuera ses exercises, en disposant sur la même échelle un
Contrepoint fleuri à deux voix, d’abord en consonnance, et
puis en dissonance entre elles, et fera la même chose à
trois et à quatre voix, tant avec des petites notes qu’avec
des grosses. Il se servira encore de la même échelle pour
Sujet, et fera moduler les autres Parties avec elle, en ren­
versant les intervalles. The scale is prescribed as a starting
”
point according to contrapuntal rules illustrated by Nicola
Sala (1794), whose text was reprinted (and translated into
French) in Choron 1808.
25  On the role of partimento fugue in eighteenth-century
German musical pedagogy, see Gingras 2008.

26  “Voulant mettre en partition un Basso fugato, ou un
Ricercare des Partimenti, le jeune homme pourra se servir
des clefs désignées par l’auteur, ou les remplacer par celles
qu’il jugera à propos. Il notera la Proposta et la Réponse
de chaque Partie, et s’il y a un Contre Sujet, il examinera
par qui on doit l’introduire. Il remplira le vide de l’harmonie
entre les Parties quelquefois leur donnant des pauses, pour
reprendre avec plus de force. Il prendra garde aux notes qui
apportent du changement dans le Mode. Il cherchera les
Contrepoints doubles, les Canons, les Renversements, les
Imitations, les Divertissements et le Stretto de la Fugue.
Enfin, outre la Basse chantante, il tachera de trouver, s’il est
possible, une basse continue, simple ou composé, qui non
seulement serve d’accompagnement, mais qui concoure
avec les autres Parties à la coutexture de l’harmonie, et à la
quelle Basse on joindra quelquefois la Basse chantante, ou
la voix qui la remplace.
”

148

J ournal o f M usi c T heory

cello, Scarlatti, Durante, Leo, Pergolesi, and Jommelli, all grand masters in
melody and in harmony.”27 Melody and harmony, that is, the art of “singing”
(“Le bon goût de la musique dérive du chant, et pour bien composer, il faut
savoir chanter”; Fenaroli and Imbimbo 1814b, 19), joined to the art of accompanying, make up an ideal, “natural” combination (Imbimbo 1821, 44–45):
Our old masters, without straying from the rules, knew well how to calculate
the effect and the impressions that a melody, accompanied but not tormented
by harmony, can make on the soul. It is so true that the people in Italy, moved
by a beautiful piece of music, yet without knowing any musical notation, retain
in the mind the most happy features of an air that they have just heard. . . .
Melody and harmony are likewise given to us by nature, but with this difference: melody, daughter of the imagination, and what I regard as the mobile
aspect of all music, being free in its progress, exists and shines on its own, while
harmony, the result of calculation, exists and shines only through the combination of several melodies, of which it is composed. Now the principle of pleasure
that we essay, deriving from that admirable union of melody with harmony, and
the rules of music uphold the same principle; any time that one strays from it,
the music is no longer natural, the expression is lacking, and the soul takes no
joy in it. These abuses have manifested themselves in all eras.28
The Neapolitan school (and the Durantist tradition)
as viewed (and reflected) by François-Joseph Fétis

François-Joseph Fétis, famous Parisian writer on music and future head of the
Belgian national conservatory, focused his attention on two related “Italian
schools” of harmonic accompaniment: a Roman one (traditionally associated
with Bernardo Pasquini) and a Neapolitan one (linked to Alessandro Scar­
latti). Both schools emphasize a style that pays close attention to all voices,
each of which need to “sing in an elegant manner” (Fétis 1840, 53; Arlin 1994,
47; Cafiero 2001a):
In Italy, things remained in this state29 with respect to harmonic theory until
the end of the seventeenth century. But the practice of accompaniment made

27  “Il faut se nourrir de la lecture des bons écrivains en
pratique comme en théorie, examiner attentivement les
exemples qu’ils citent, et surout étudier Marcello, Scarlatti,
Durante, Leo, Pergolesi, et Jom[m]elli, tous grands maîtres
en Mélodie, et en Harmonie.
”
28  “Nos anciens maîtres, sans s’écarter des règles, savaient
bien calculer l’effet, et les impressions que la mélodie,
accompagnée, mais non tourmentée par l’harmonie, pour­
rait faire sur l’ame; cela est si vrai, que le peuple en Italie,
pénétré d’une belle musique, sans connaître le moindre
signe musical, retient dans sa tête les traits les plus heureux
d’un air qu’il vient d’entendre. . . .
“La mélodie et l’harmonie nous sont également don­
nées par la nature, avec cette différence que la mélodie,

fille de l’imagination, et que je regarde comme le mobile
de toute la musique, étant libre dans sa marche, subsiste
et brille toute seule, au lieu que l’harmonie, résultant du
calcul, ne subsiste et ne brille que par la combinaison de
plusieurs mélodies, dont elle est composée. Or, le principe
du plaisir que nous éprouvons, dérivant de cet accord admi­
rable de la mélodie avec l’harmonie, et les règles musicales
tenant au même principe; toutes les fois qu’on s’en écarte,
la musique n’est pas naturelle, l’expression est manquée,
et l’ame n’en jouit pas. Ces abus se sont manifestés dans
tous les temps.
”
29  Fétis refers to harmonic rules proposed by Lorenzo
Penna (1672).

Rosa Cafiero 

  Partimento Theory in France

149

considerable progress, particularly in the schools of Pasquini in Rome and Alessandro Scarlatti in Naples. For their students, these great masters wrote numerous figured basses, to which the name partimenti was given. Instead of striking
chords, following the French and German usage, these masters demanded that
the accompanist have all the accompaniment parts sing in an elegant manner.
In this connection, the Italians maintained an incontestable superiority in the
art of accompanying for a long time.30

Fétis cites Durante as the turning point between the Roman and the
Neapolitan traditions (Fétis 1865, 3:88–89):
Durante’s makeup was very different from that of his master [Scarlatti]. Less
full of ideas, cold by temperament, timid in character and in social position, in
short, a complete stranger to the boldness of dramatic genius, Durante portrayed in music the devotion of his religious sentiments, the clarity of his conception, the pure taste and respect for the traditions of the school which characterize his talent. Even if he did not go to Rome, he obviously made a serious
study of the masters of the Roman school, and his work had the aim of introducing the more severe forms to the Neapolitan school. Such was his role in the
direction that the art took in Naples during the eighteenth century. Thus one
sees that he was in no way an apprentice of Gaetano Greco and Scarlatti; a reading of his scores demonstrates that he was changed under the influence of
Roman genius.31

General principles that derived from the nature des choses play a primary role
in Durante’s doctrine, in which Fétis—adapting a concept already focused on
by Choron (Simms 1975, 119; Schellhous 1991, 224–25)—finds the basis of
tonality (Fétis 1865, 3:88–89):
This master [Durante] is deemed the most expert professor that the Neapolitan school ever had. It would, however, be an error to believe that his expertise
was founded on a clear doctrine, where all the facts would have been deduced
from general principles drawn from the nature of things. There was never anything like it in the schools of Italy. The method of instruction had, as its only
basis, a school tradition emanating far more from feeling than from reason.
30  “Les choses restèrent en cet état en Italie jusqu’à la fin
du dix-septième siècle, à l’égard de la théorie de l’harmonie;
mais la pratique de l’accompagnement fit de grands pro­
grès, particulièrement dans les écoles de Pasquini, à Rome,
et d’Alexandre Scarlatti, à Naples. Ces grands musiciens
écrivirent pour leurs élèves beaucoup de basses chiffrées
auxquelles on donna le nom de partimenti: au lieu d’y faire
plaquer des accords, suivant l’usage des Français et des
Allemands, ces maîtres exigeaient que l’accompagnateur
fit chanter d’une manière élégante toutes les parties de
l’accompagnement. Sous ce rapport, les Italiens con­
servèrent long-temps une incontestable supériorité dans
l’art d’accompagner. See Cafiero 2001a.
”

31  “L
’organisation de Durante était très-différente de celle
de son maître [Scarlatti]; peu riche d’idées, froid par tem­
pérament; timide par caractère et par position sociale; enfin,
complétement étranger aux hardiesses du génie drama­
tique, Durante portait dans la musique la dévotion de ses
sentiments religieux, la lucidité de conception, le goût pur et
le respect des traditions d’école qui caractérisent son talent.
S’il n’alla pas à Rome, il fit évidemment une étude sérieuse
des maîtres de l’école romaine, et ses travaux eurent pour
objet d’introduire dans l’école napolitaine des formes plus
sévères. C’est là son rôle dans la direction que l’art prit à
Naples au dix-huitième siècle. On voit donc qu’il n’avait pas
tout appris de Gaetano Greco et de Scarlatti: la lecture de
ses partitions démontre qu’il s’était modifié sous l’influence
du génie de Rome.
”

150

J ournal o f M usi c T heory

Under this regime, Durante appears to have had, more than any other teacher,
the talent for communicating this tradition, and the most sophisticated feeling
for the tonality. An irrefutable proof is the great number of excellent students
that he trained. One distinguishes two different epochs during his professorship. The first produced Traetta, Vinci, Terradellas, and Jommelli. The second,
which begins with the death of Leo and ends with his own passing, gave rise to
talents of the first order, such as those of Piccinni, Sacchini, Guglielmi, and
Paisiello.32

Compared to this august tradition, Fétis levies very severe judgments on
Fenaroli’s Rules. For Fétis they are no more than anachronistic, simple, and
empirical (Fétis 1840, 131–32; Jenni 1992, 456), whose only aim seems to be a
synthetic, pedagogical reformulation of Durante’s theories (Fétis 1840, 143):
“We cannot consider the [Regole musicali per i principianti di cembalo, nel sonar coi
numeri e per i principianti di contrappunto (Naples: Mazzola, 1775)] of Fenaroli
as the exposé of a harmonic theory. It is only a practical outline of the tradition, pure but outmoded, of Durante’s school; it did not represent the current
state of the art.”33 In his Traité complet de la théorie et de la pratique de l’harmonie
(Fétis 1875, 136–44, esp. 140–43), Fétis describes the figured-bass shorthand
employed by Neapolitan masters like Scarlatti, Nicola Porpora, Durante, and
eventually Fenaroli. Fétis constantly reminds the reader of Neapolitan “simplicity” (Fétis 1875, 139–40; see also Daw 1985–86, 51–60; Cafiero 1993a; Borgir 1987, 154):
§ 230 At the end of the seventeenth and the beginning of the eighteenth century, the system of signs for chords was extremely simple in the Neapolitan
school. The triad gets no sign: one assumes it for all the notes where there is no
other sign indicated, unless it becomes major or minor by signs not present in
the key signature. In this case, one indicates its nature by either a sharp, a flat,
or a natural sign, with or without a figure.
One signifies the chord of sixth with a 6, along with the sign that indicates its quality. The six-four chord is indicated by 6; and that of the six-five
4
chord by 6.
5
In the scores of the Neapolitan masters one sometimes finds the figure
≥6
≥ 4. It indicates a tritone chord [a six-four-two chord with a tritone between the
raised 4 and the bass].
32  “Ce maître est considéré comme le plus habile profes­
seur qu’ait eu l’école Napolitaine; toutefois, on serait dans
l’erreur si l’on croyait que son habileté consistait dans une
doctrine lumineuse, où tous les faits auraient été ramenés
à des principes généraux tirés de la nature des choses. Il
n’y a jamais eu rien de pareil dans les écoles d’Italie. La
méthode d’enseignement n’y avait d’autre base qu’une
tradition d’école émanée d’un sentiment bien plus que
du raisonnement. Sous ce rapport, Durante paraît avoir eu
plus qu’aucun autre le talent de communiquer cette tradi­
tion, et le sentiment le plus perfectionné de la tonalité. Le
grand nombre d’élèves excellents qu’il a formés en est une

preuve irrécusable. On distingue deux époques dans son
professorat. La première a produit Traetta, Vinci, Terrade­
glias et Jom[m]elli; la seconde, qui commence à la mort
de Leo et qui finit à la sienne, a fait éclore des talents de
premier ordre, tels que ceux de Piccinni, Sacchini, Guglielmi
et Paisiello.
”
33  “On ne peut considérer les règles d’accompagnement
pratique de Fenaroli (Naples, 1795) comme l’exposé d’une
théorie d’harmonie; ce n’est qu’un aperçu pratique de la tra­
dition de l’école de Durante; tradition pure, mais arriérée, et
qui ne représentait pas l’état actuel de l’art.
”

Rosa Cafiero 

  Partimento Theory in France

151

The chord of the dominant seventh is figured by 7 or 7, the chord of a
Ω
≥
plain seventh acting as a suspension to the sixth, by 7, and finally, that of a
diminished seventh, by 7, or ≤7.
5
5
It is worth noting that Scarlatti and his pupils often scored their works in
three parts, and that the Neapolitan school fashioned accompaniments at the
organ or the harpsichord in the same manner until the end of the eighteenth
century. Thus the harmonist-accompanist who wants to reflect the thought of
these authors must not only know the meaning of their figures but also choose
from among the best chordal intervals to make a three-part accompaniment.
The result of this system is a singing form which one does not find in an accompaniment sounded out in four parts.34

A quotation from Imbimbo’s Seguito de’ Partimenti sheds further light on the
latter description, concerning the three-voice “singing form” (Fenaroli and
Imbimbo 1814b, 18): “As Durante would say, great art does not consist in using
all the notes that a certain chord might allow, but in suppressing some of them
which might have produced a coarse or confused effect.”35
Fétis (1875, 140) focuses on Durante’s and Leonardo Leo’s role in the
tradition and describes the “Neapolitan” prescriptions for figured bass as summarized from Fenaroli’s Regole: “Durante and Leo, great composers of the
Neapolitan school who succeeded Scarlatti and became masters of the city’s
conservatories, perfected this school’s system of figured bass, a system which
is unchanged since then, and which is still a force in teaching, even though it
is no longer in step with the current situation of harmony.”36 The rules have
gained the role of an antiquarian codification and no longer correspond to

34  “Le système des signes des accords fut fort simple dans
l’école de Naples, à la fin du XVIIe siècle et au commence­
ment du XVIIIe. L
’accord parfait ne s’y chiffre pas; on le sup­
pose sur toutes les notes où il n’y a point d’autre accord
indiqué, à moins qu’il ne devienne ou majeur ou mineur, par
des signes qui ne sont pas auprès de la clef; dans ce cas,
on indique sa nature ou par le dièse, ou par le bémol, ou par
le bécarre, sans chiffre, ou avec le chiffre.
“L
’accord de sixte se chiffre par 6, avec le signe qui
indique sa nature. L
’accord de quarte et sixte et désigné par
6
6
4 ; et celui de quinte et sixte par 5.
“Quelquefois on trouve dans les partitions des maîtres
napolitains le chiffre double ≥6: il indique l’accord de triton.
≥4
“L
’accord de septième dominante est chiffré par 7 ou 7 ;
Ω
≥
l’accord de septième simple retardant la sixte, par 7; enfin,
celui de septième diminuée, par 7, ou par ≤7.
5
5
“Il est à remarquer que Scarlatti et ses élèves écri­
virent souvent leur instrumentation à trois parties, et que
l’accompagnement de l’orgue ou du clavecin s’est fait de
la même manière dans l’école napolitaine jusque vers la
fin du XVIIIe siècle. L
’harmoniste accompagnateur, qui veut
rendre la pensée de ces auteurs, doit non-seulement con­
naître la signification de leurs chiffres, mai faire un choix

des meilleurs intevalles des accords pour accompagner à
trois parties. Le résultat de ce système est une forme chan­
tante qu’on ne trouve pas dans l’accompagnement plaqué
à quatre parties.
”
On Scarlatti’s approach to voicing and texture in a cantata
accompaniment, see Daw 1985–86, 51–60. On Scar­atti’s
l
Regole per principianti (included among Selvaggi’s manu­
scripts, now in London, British Library Additional 14244),
see Cafiero 1993a. See also Borgir 1987 154.
,
35  “Le grand art, disoit Durante, ne consiste pas à faire
usage de toutes les notes, dont un accord est susceptible,
mais d’en supprimer quelques-unes qui pourroient produirre
de la rudesse, ou de la confusion.
”
36  Fétis (1875, 140) refers to Fenaroli (1795): “Durante et
Leo, grands compositeurs de l’école de Naples, qui suc­
cédèrent à Scarlatti et devinrent les maîtres des Conserva­
toires de cette ville, complétèrent le système de la basse
chiffrée de cette école; système qui n’a plus varié, et qui est
encore en vigueur dans l’enseignement, bien qu’il ne soit
plus en rapport avec la situation actuelle de l’harmonie.
”

152

J ournal o f M usi c T heory

contemporary harmony. Fétis severely deprecates the anachronistic teaching
methods which continue to be used in Naples (as reflected in many biographies from his Biographie universelle, e.g., Zingarelli’s). The only Neapolitan
harmony textbook he seems to appreciate is Gaspare Selvaggi’s Trattato di
Armonia37 (1823), which is founded on totally different principles and focuses
on chord “succession” (Fétis 1865, 8:12). Selvaggi’s way of thinking is definitely
much more oriented toward rational principles and toward the foundation of
a grammar than toward empiricism. His wide education and his intellectual
status put him on a different level from professional—and for Fétis definitely
too practical—musicians.
Fétis summarizes the most frequent figures occurring in Neapolitan
scores. In so doing, he seems to have been inspired by a sense of Linnean
order and classification rather than by a real need to focus on and understand what we might call the Neapolitan Weltanschauung, founded primarily
on improvisation, intuition, and nonverbal theory (Fétis 1875, 140–42):
1. One does not figure a triad made up of notes belonging to the tonality.
If the triad becomes major in a minor key, one figures it with 3≥ or 3Ω, or simply
with the ≥, or with a lone Ω when canceling a flat. If the triad becomes minor in
a major key, one figures it with 3≤ or 3Ω, or simply with a ≤ or Ω.
2. If the triad follows a retardation of third by the fourth [i.e., a 4–3 suspension], one figures it with 3; if it follows a retardation of octave by the ninth,
it is indicated by 8. And when it precedes a chord of the sixth on the same [bass]
note, or when it follows one, it is indicated by 5.
3. The plain sixth chord, derived from the [root position] triad, is figured with a 6. If it becomes major in a minor key, one figures it with ≥6 or Ω6. If
it becomes minor in a major key, it is indicated by ≤6 or Ω6. It is also with a ≥6 or
Ω6 that one designates the augmented sixth chord.
4. The six-four chord is figured with 6.
4
5. All seventh chords, whatever their nature, are simply figured with a 7
when no circumstance foreign to the key manifests itself in the harmony. In the
works of Neapolitan composers, this is the figure that indicates the dominant
seventh chord, the suspension of the sixth by the seventh, the minor seventh
chord on the second scale degree (produced by the combination of prolongation [= a suspension] with substitution), and even the diminished seventh
chord. This last is also sometimes figured as 7.
5
If there is a change of key, the major third of the dominant seventh chord
is indicated by a sharp or flat, as in ≥7 or Ω7.

37  “Selvaggi is the first Italian author who brought to this
science the true method of exposition and analysis. He fore­
saw the important role of tonality in melody and harmony,
and understood that a theory of the chords cannot be under­
stood without a consideration of their order of succession”
(“Selvaggi est le premier auteur italien qui porta dans cette
science la véritable méthode d’exposition et d’analyse. Il

a entrevu le rôle important de la tonalité dans la mélodie
et l’harmonie, et a compris que la théorie des accords ne
peut être compris que par la considération de leur ordre de
succession”; Fétis 1865, vol. 8, 12 [entry “Selvaggi”]). For
a survey of Fétis’s theories—Fétis described himself as the
first discoverer of harmonic “truths”—in relation to Choron’s
views, see Simms 1975.

Rosa Cafiero 

  Partimento Theory in France

153

If the minor third of the seventh chord on the second scale degree is a
result of a change of key, the sign for that chord is ≤7 or Ω7.
6. The six-five chord with diminished fifth, first inversion of the dominant seventh chord, is indicated by 6, just like the six-five chord on the fourth
5
scale degree. The difference between these two chords is not noticed by the
accompanist, save that the first one has the leading tone for its bass.
7. The chord with the sixth as leading tone, second inversion of the dominant seventh chord, is figured with 6≥ or 6Ω. One indicates it, according to the
≥
Ω
context, by 6 or 6. The sharp and the natural sign, placed after the 6 or above it,
distinguish this chord from that of the plain major sixth, where the accidental
precedes the figure.
8. The tritone chord, third inversion of the dominant seventh, is figured
4
or 4 in the major mode, where there is no tone foreign to the key; and by 4≥, 4≥,
2
2
≥6
4Ω
≥ 4, or 2 when the fourth is made major by an accidental sharp or by the canceling of a flat. In the minor mode, the sharp or natural is always placed beside
the figure.
9. In the plain triad, the delay [= suspension] of the third by a fourth is
simply figured as 4; the same delay as part of a seventh chord is figured 7. This
4
last figure is used to indicate the delay of the sixth by a seventh in a six-four
chord.
10. The delay of the octave by a ninth is figured by + . The “+” sign, of
9
which one hardly understands the purpose, seems intended to show the necessity of a third to accompany the delay; for when the third is minor, one figures
it with ≤+. [The “+” sign was actually a Roman numeral ten, “X”; see Gjerdingen,
9
this issue (93)]
11. The delay of the third by the bass, in a sixth chord, producing a second and a fifth, is figured by 5. The same delay, with substitution, producing a
2
second, fourth, and sixth, is figured by 4.38
2

38  1.° L
’accord parfait ne se chiffre pas sur les notes qui lui
appartiennent dans la tonalité. S’il devient majeur dans un
ton mineur, on le chiffre par 3≥ ou 3Ω, ou seulement par le
≥ seul, ou par le Ω seul supprimant un bémol. S’il devient
mineur dans un ton majeur, on le chiffre ≤3 ou Ω3, ou seule­
ment par ≤ ou par Ω.
2.° Si l’accord parfait succède à un retard de tierce par la
quarte, on le chiffre par 3; s’il succède à un retard d’octave
par la neuvième, il est désigné par 8. Lorsqu’il précède
l’accord de sixte sur la même note, ou lorsqu’il le suit, on
l’indique par 5.
3.° L
’accord de sixte simple, dérivé de l’accord parfait,
est chiffré par 6. S’il devient majeur dans un ton mineur, on
le chiffre par ≥6 ou par Ω6; s’il devient mineur dans un ton
majeur, il est indiqué par ≤6, ou par Ω6. C’est aussi par ≥6 ou
Ω6 qu’on désigne l’accord de sixte augmentée.
4.° L
’accord de quarte et sixte est chiffré par 6.
4
5.° Tout accord de septième, quelle que soit sa nature,
est chiffré simplement par 7 quand aucune circonstance
,
étrangère au ton ne se manifeste dans l’harmonie. C’est ce
chiffre qui, dans les ouvrages des compositeurs napolitains,

indique l’accord de septième de la dominante, le retard de
la sixte par la septième, l’accord de septième mineure du
second degré, produit par la réunion de la prolongation avec
la substitution, et même l’accord de septième diminuée.
Celui-ci est aussi chiffré quelquefois par 7.
5
S’il y a un changement de ton, la tierce majeure de la
septième de dominante est indiquée par un dièse ou par un
bécarre, de cette manière ≥7 ou Ω7
,
.
Si la tierce mineure de l’accord de septième du ­ econd
s
degré est le résultat d’un changement de ton, le signe de
cet accord est ≤7 ou Ω7
.
6.° L
’accord de quinte mineure et sixte, premier dérivé
de l’accord de septième de dominante, est indiqué par 6,
5
comme l’accord de quinte et sixte du quatrième degré.
La différence de ces deux accords n’est connue de
l’accompagnateur, que parce que le premier a pour basse
une note sensible.
7 L
.° ’accord de sixte sensible, deuxième derivé de
l’accord de septième de dominante, est chiffré par 6≥ ou
≥
6Ω. On l’indique aussi, suivant les circonstances, par 6 ou
Ω
6. Le dièse et le bécarre, placés après le 6, ou au-dessus,

154

J ournal o f M usi c T heory

Eventually Fétis chooses a partimento in B minor (Fenaroli and Imbimbo
1814a, 75, no. 22; Choron 1808, no. 50; Fenaroli and Girard n.d., 14, bk. 2, no.
6; Fétis 1875, 142; Cafiero 2001b, 213) from among those invented by Fenaroli
and realizes it according to his version of the Neapolitan rules, an aperçu pratique antithetical to every sort of principle of a théorie d’harmonie (Groth 1978).
The realization is severe in style and gives no opportunities for the “improvising” instrumental voices that were supposed to be still in use in Naples, at least
among the epigones of the Durantist tradition in the first three decades of the
nineteenth century. As one can see in Example 4, Fétis has cast a stereotyped
model upon a living and continuously evolving tradition.
When correcting partimenti and exercises in counterpoint, Durante
used to answer his pupils’ questions with the following words (Florimo 1882,
180–81): “My dear pupils, do it this way, because this is the way you have to
do it. It must be like this, because truth and beauty are unique, and I can feel
that I am not wrong. I can give you no reasons for what you ask me; teachers
who will step into my shoes will find them, and starting from my easy rules will
build up many axioms and infallible rules.”
A dearth of systematic theory or “infallible rules” in favor of subjective
génie and intuition survives in the Neapolitan historiographical tradition.
This “tale” about Durante’s teaching methods reported by Francesco Florimo
(who had heard it from Giovanni Furno, his partimento teacher at the Collegio di Musica, who had in turn heard it from his teacher Carlo Cotumacci)
has helped to strengthen and spread a long-surviving myth. Today, we can see
that the Neapolitan tradition, when fully functioning in its world of close-knit
teachers and students, was indeed a highly systematized process for developing skills in improvisation and composition. But when taken out of its native
context and reduced to “treatises” read by students unaware of the tradition,
it began to transform into part of the nineteenth-century study of harmony. It

font connaître la différence de cet accord avec celui de sixte
simple majeur, où le signe précède le chiffre.
8.° L
’accord de triton, troisième dérivé de l’accord de
septième de dominante, est chiffré par 4 ou par 4, dans le
2
mode majeur, lorsqu’il n’y a aucune circonstance étrangère
au ton; et par 4≥, 4≥, ≥6, ou 4Ω, lorsque la quarte est rendue
2
≥4
2
majeure par un dièse nouveau, ou par la suppression d’un
bémol. Dans le mode mineur, le dièse ou le bécarre sont
toujours placés à côté du chiffre.
9.° Le retard de la tierce par la quarte, dans l’accord
parfait, est chiffré simplement par 4; le même retard, dans
l’accord de septième, è chiffré par 7. Ce dernier chiffre est
4
employé pour indiquer le retard de la sixte par la septième
dans l’accord de quarte et sixte.
10.° Le retard de l’octave par la neuvième est chiffré par
+
9. Le signe +, dont on ne comprend guère l’utilité, paraît des­

tiné à indiquer la nécessité de la tierce pour accom­ agner le
p
retard; car lorsque la tierce est mineure, on chiffre par ≤+.
9
11.° Le retard de la tierce par la basse, dans l’accord
de sixte, produisant seconde et quinte, est chiffré par 5.
2
Le même retard, avec la substitution, produisant ­ econde,
s
quarte et sixte, est chiffré par 4.
2”

Rosa Cafiero 

  Partimento Theory in France

Example 4.  A realization by Fétis of a partimento by Fenaroli (Fétis 1875, 142)

is in Paris, at the end of the eighteenth and the beginning of the nineteenth
centuries, that this transformation takes place. And it is in the documents
described above that we can detect subtle shifts of concepts as partimenti leave
their homeland of an essentially oral tradition and are subsumed into a foreign, more literary tradition of printed harmony books.

155

156

J ournal o f M usi c T heory

Works Cited

Abbate, Alessandro. 2007. “Due autori per un testo di contrappunto di scuola napoletana:
Leonardo Leo e Michele Gabellone.” Studi musicali 36: 123–59.
Arlin, Mary I. 1994. Esquisse de l’histoire de l’harmonie. An English-Language Translation of the
F
­ rançois-Joseph Fétis History of Harmony. Trans. and ed. Mary I. Arlin. Harmonologia Series
7. Stuyvesant, NY: Pendragon.
Avellino, Francesco Maria. 1818. Elogio di Fedele Fenaroli letto nell’Accademia delle Belle Arti della
Società Reale Borbonica. Naples: Trani.
Azzopardi, Francesco. 1786. Le musicien pratique ou Leçons qui conduisent les élèves dans l’art du contrepoint en leur enseignant la manière de composer correctement tout espece de musique. . . . Ouvrage
composé dans les principes des conservatoires d’Italie, mis dans l’ordre le plus simple et le pous
clair . . . ; traduit de l’italien par M. Framery. Paris: Le Duc.
Bertini, Giuseppe. 1814–15. Dizionario storico-critico degli scrittori di musica e de’ più celebri artisti
di tutte le nazioni sì antiche che moderne. . . . 4 vols. Palermo: Dalla Tipografia reale di
guerra.
Biferi. 1770. Traité de musique abrégé, divisé en trois parties. La première traite du Chant, la seconde
de l’accompagnement du clavecin, et la troisième de la composition. Avec un traité de fugues. Par
M. Biferi fils, maître de chapelle napolitain. Paris: Biferi.
Borgir, Tharald. 1987. The Performance of the Basso Continuo in Italian Baroque Music. Ann Arbor:
UMI Research Press.
Burney, Charles. 1771. The Present State of Music in France and Italy. London: Becket.
Cafiero, Rosa. 1993a. “La didattica del partimento a Napoli fra Settecento e Ottocento: Note
sulla fortuna delle Regole di Carlo Cotumacci.” In Gli affetti convenienti all’idee: Studi sulla
musica vocale italiana, ed. Maria Caraci, Rosa Cafiero, and Angela Romagnoli, 549–80.
Naples: Edizioni Scientifiche Italiane.
———. 1993b. “Una biblioteca per la biblioteca: la collezione musicale di Giuseppe Sigismondo.” In Napoli e il teatro musicale in Europa fra Sette e Ottocento. Studi in onore di Friedrich
Lippmann, ed. Bianca Maria Antolini and Wolfgang Witzenmann, 299–367. Florence:
Olschki.
———. 1999. “Metodi, progetti e riforme dell’insegnamento della ‘scienza armonica’ nel
Real Collegio di musica di Napoli nei primi decenni dell’Ottocento.” Studi musicali 28:
425–81.
———. 2001a. “Teorie armoniche di scuola napoletana ai primi dell’Ottocento: cenni sulla
fortuna di Francesco Durante fra Napoli e Parigi.” In Giacomo Francesco Milano e il ruolo
dell’aristocrazia nel patrocinio delle attività musicali nel secolo XVIII, ed. Gaetano Pitarresi,
171–98. Reggio Calabria: Laruffa.
———. 2001b. “Un divulgatore di teorie armoniche della scuola napoletana a Parigi: Emanuele Imbimbo (1756–1839).” In Francesco Salfi librettista, Studi e testi, ed. Francesco Paolo
Russo, 191–225. Vibo Valentia: Monteleone.
———. 2005a. “Conservatories and the Neapolitan School: A European Model at the End of
the 18th Century?” In Music Education in Europe (1770–1914): Compositional, Institutional
and Political Challenges, ed. Michael Fend and Michel Noiray, 1: 15–29. Berlin: Berlin
Wissenschafts-Verlag.
———. 2005b. “Carlo Cotumacci nella tradizione didattica della ‘scuola napoletana.’” In Affetti
musicali. Studi in onore di Sergio Martinotti, ed. Maurizio Padoan, 105–20. Milan: Vita e
Pensiero.
Cafiero, Rosa and Francesca Seller. 1989. “Editoria musicale a Napoli attraverso la stampa periodica: il ‘Giornale del Regno delle Due Sicilie’ 1817–1860.” Le Fonti Musicali in Italia.
Studi e Ricerche 3: 57–90.
Catalogo della collezione d’autografi lasciata alla R. Accademia Filarmonica di Bologna dall’accademico
Ab. Dott. Masseangelo Masseangeli. . . . 1896. Bologna: Regia Tipografia. Reprint. ­ ologna:
B
Forni, 1969.

Rosa Cafiero 

  Partimento Theory in France

Choron, Alexandre-Étienne. 1808. Principes de Composition des écoles d’Italie. . . . 3 vols. Paris:
Le Duc.
Choron, Alexandre-Étienne and François Fayolle. 1810. Dictionnaire historique des musiciens. Vol.
1. Paris: Valade.
Choron, Alexandre-Étienne and Vincenzo Fiocchi. 1804. Principes d’accompagnement des Ecoles
d’Italie Extraits des meilleur Auteurs: Leo, Durante, Fenaroli, Sala, Azopardi, Sabbatini, le père
Martini, et autres. Ouvrage classique Servant d’Introduction à l’étude de la Composition Traduit
de l’italien, disposé dans l’ordre le plus propre à en faciliter l’intelligence et la pratique. Et dedié à
Monsieur Tarchi par Alexandre Choron et Vincenzo Fiocchi Ci-devant Organiste de S.t Pierre du
Vatican à Rome et Maitre de Musique de S. A. R. Ferdinand II. Grand Duc de Florence. Publ.
No. 312. Paris: Imbault.
Christensen, Thomas. 1992. “The Règle de l’Octave in Thorough-Bass Theory and Practice.” Acta
Musicologica 64: 91–117.
Daw, Brian A. 1985–86. “Alessandro Scarlatti’s Continuo Realization of Da sventura a sventura
(1690): An Analysis and Observations Relating to Late Seventeenth-Century Keyboard
Practices.” Early Keyboard Journal 4: 51–60.
Dellaborra, Mariateresa. 2007. “‘Musico pratico al cimbalo’: Paisiello e le Regole per bene
accompagnare il partimento (1782).” Studi musicali 36: 443–67.
De Rosa, Carlo Antonio (marchese di Villarosa). 1840. Memorie dei compositori di musica del Regno
di Napoli. Naples: Stamperia Reale.
Di Giacomo, Salvatore. 1924. I quattro antichi Conservatorii di musica di Napoli. Il conservatorio di
Sant’Onofrio a Capuana e quello di S. Maria della Pietà dei Turchini. [Palermo]: Sandron.
———. 1928. I quattro antichi Conservatorii di musica di Napoli. Il conservatorio dei Poveri di Gesù
Cristo e quello di S. Maria di Loreto. [Palermo]: Sandron.
Fellerer, Carl Gustav. 1939. Der Partimentospieler, Übungen in Generalbass-Spiel und in gebundener
Improvisation. Leipzig: Breitkopf & Härtel.
Fenaroli, Fedele. 1775. Regole musicali per i principianti di cembalo. Naples: Mazzola-Vocola.
———. 1795. Regole musicali per i principianti di cembalo. Naples: Mazzola-Vocola.
———. 1814. Regole musicali per i principianti di cembalo nel sonar co i numeri, e per i principianti di contropunto del signor Maestro Fenaroli. Quinta edizione con nuova aggiunta. Naples:
S
­ angiacomo.
Fenaroli, Fedele and Giuseppe Girard. N.d. Partimenti o sia Basso numerato di Fedele Fenaroli Per
uso degli Alunni del R. Collegio di Musica di Napoli. . . . Publ. No. 959. Naples: Stabilimento
Musicale Partenopeo Antica Casa Girard Strada S. Pietro a Majella 30, 31, 32.
Fenaroli, Fedele and Emanuele Imbimbo. 1814a. Partimenti ossia Basso numerato di Fedele Fenaroli
Per uso degli alunni del Regal Conservatorio di Napoli a Niccola Zingarelli Maestro di S. Pietro
in Roma Direttore del medesimo Conservatorio Dall’Editore Dedicata. . . . Publ. No. 500. Paris:
À la Typographie de la Sirène, Chez Carli, Editeur, M.d de Musique, Livres Italiens et
Cordes de Naples, Péristyle du Théâtre Favart, côté de la Rue Mariveaux.
———. 1814b. Seguito de’ Partimenti ossia Esercizio d’Armonia Vocale e Instrumentale Sopra i Bassi
Fugati composto da E. Imbimbo ed al Sig.r Fedele Fenaroli Rispettosamente Dedicato | Suite des
Partimenti ou Exercise d’Harmonie Vocale et Instrumentale Sur les Basses Fugati Composé par
E. Imbimbo et Dedié avec Respect A Monsieur Fedele Fenaroli. Publ. No. 536. Paris: Chez Carli,
Editeur et M.d de Musique, Place et Péristyle des Italiens.
Fétis, François-Joseph. 1840. Esquisse de l’histoire de l’harmonie, considérée comme art et comme science
systématique. Paris: Bourgogne and Martinet.
———. 1844. Traité complet de la théorie et de la pratique de l’harmonie contenant la doctrine de la science et de l’art. Paris: Schlesinger.
———. 1865. Biographie universelle des musiciens et bibliographie générale de la musique. 2nd ed. 8
vols. Paris: Firmin Didot Frère, Fils et Cie.
———. 1875. Traité complet de la théorie et de la pratique de l’harmonie contenant la doctrine de la science et de l’art. 11th ed. Paris: Brandus et Cie.

157

158

J ournal o f M usi c T heory

Florimo, Francesco. 1882. La scuola musicale di Napoli e i suoi Conservatorii. Vol. 2. Naples:
Morano.
Gingras, Bruno. 2008. “Partimento Fugue in Eighteenth-Century Germany: A Bridge between
Thoroughbass Lessons and Fugal Composition.” Eighteenth Century Music 5: 51–74.
Gjerdingen, Robert O. 2005. Monuments of Partimenti. http://facultyweb.at.northwestern.edu/
music/gjerdingen/partimenti/index.htm.
———. 2007. Music in the Galant Style: Being a Treatise on Various Schemata Characteristic of
E
­ ighteenth-Century Music for Courtly Chambers, Chapels, and Theaters, Including Tasteful Passages of Music Drawn from Most Excellent Chapel Masters in the Employ of Noble and Noteworthy
Personages, Said Music All Collected for the Reader’s Delectation on the World Wide Web. New
York: Oxford University Press.
Grétry, André-Modest. 1789. Mémoires ou essais sur la musique. Reprint. Paris: De l’imprimerie
de la République Pluviôse, an V, 1798.
Grossi, Giovanni Battista Gennaro. 1819. I corifei della scuola di Napoli. Probole. In Biografia degli
uomini illustri del Regno di Napoli ornata dei loro rispettivi ritratti Volume che contiene gli elogj
dei maestri di cappella, cantori, e cantanti più celebri Compilato da diversi letterati nazionali
dedicato al Real Collegio di Musica di Napoli. Naples: Gervasi.
Groth, Renate. 1978. “Zur Theorie der Musik bei François-Joseph Fétis.” In Heinrich Sievers zum
70. Geburtstag, ed. Günter Katzenberger, 47–57. Tutzing: Schneider.
Hansell, Sven Hostrup. 1968. “The Cadence in 18th-Century Recitative.” Musical Quarterly 54:
228–48.
Hughes-Hughes, Augustus. 1906–9. Catalogue of Manuscript Music in the British Museum. London: British Museum. Reprint. I: Sacred vocal music, II: Secular vocal music, III: Instrumental
music, treatises etc. London: British Museum, 1964–65.
Imbimbo, Emanuele. 1821. Observations sur l’enseignement mutuel appliqué à la musique, et sur
quelques abus introduites dans cet art: précédées d’une notice sur les Conservatoires di Naples.
Paris: Didot.
Indice di tutti i libri e spartiti di musica che conservansi nell’archivio del Real Conservatorio della Pietà
de’ Torchini. Naples, 1801.
Jenni, Donald Martin. 1992. “Fétis and Le sens musical.” In Convention in Eighteenth- and Nineteenth-Century Music, Essays in Honor of Leonard G. Ratner, ed. Wye Jamison Allanbrook,
Janet M. Levy, and William P. Mahrt, 447–72. New York: Pendragon.
Kandler, Franz Sales. 1821. “Ueber den gegenwärtingen Kulturstand des königlichen Musikcollegiums in Neapel mit einem vorangehenden Rückblicke auf die verblichenen Conservatorien dieser Hauptstadt.” Allgemeine musikalische Zeitung 24 (Dec. 1821), no. 50
(cols. 833–42), no. 51 (cols. 856–63), no. 52 (cols. 869–78).
Langlé, Honoré-François-Marie. 1797. Traité d’harmonie et de modulation par H. F. M. Langlé
ancien premier maître du Conservatoire de la Pietà à Naples professeur du Conservatoire de
Paris. . . . Paris: Boyer; reprint Nadermann, Rue de la Loi, à la Clef d’Or, Passage de
l’ancien Café de Foy.
———. 1798. Traité de la basse sous le chant, précédé de toutes les règles de la composition. . . . Paris:
Nadermann.
———. 1801. Nouvelle méthode pour chiffer [sic] les accords. . . . Paris.
Libby, Dennis. 1988. “Giuseppe Sigismondo, an Eighteenth-Century Amateur, Musician, and
Historian.” Studi Pergolesiani/Pergolesi Studies 2: 222–38.
Napoli-Signorelli, Pietro. 1847. “Ricerche sul sistema melodrammatico lette a’ soci pontaniani. ​
. . . Nelle Adunanze de’ mesi di Novembre, e Dicembre 1812.” Atti della Società Pontaniana di Napoli 4: 1–125.
Penna, Lorenzo. 1672. Li primi albori musicali. Bologna: Monti.
Pierre, Constant. 1900. Le Conservatoire national de musique et de déclamation. Documents historiques
et administratifs. Paris: Imprimerie Nationale.
Rousseau, Jean-Jacques. 1768. Dictionnaire de musique. Paris: Veuve Duchesne.

Rosa Cafiero 

  The Early Reception of Neapolitan Partimento Theory in France

Sala, Nicola. 1794. Regole del contrappunto pratico di Nicola Sala napoletano, primo maestro del Reale
Conservatorio della Pietà de’ Torchini dedicate alla maestà di Ferdinando IV re delle due Sicilie. 3
vols. Naples: Stamperia Reale.
Sanguinetti, Giorgio. 1999. “I travagli del ‘celeste impero’: La teoria della composizione a
Napoli nell’Ottocento fra tradizione e innovazione.” In Giorgio Sanguinetti, Intersezioni.
Quattro studi di teoria e analisi musicale, 137–83. Cosenza: Università della Calabria.
———. 2005. “Decline and Fall of the ‘Celeste Impero’: The Theory of Composition in Naples
During the Ottocento.” Studi musicali 34: 451–502.
Schellhous, Rosalie. 1991. “Fetis’s Tonality as a Metaphysical Principle: Hypothesis for a New
Science.” Music Theory Spectrum 13: 219–40.
Selvaggi, Gaspare. 1823. Trattato di Armonia ordinato con nuovo metodo e corredato di tavole a dichiarazione delle cose in esso esposte. Naples: Miranda.
Shearon, Stephen. 2000. “Watermarks and Rastra in Neapolitan Music Manuscripts, 1700–
1815.” In Puzzles in Paper: Concepts in Historical Watermarks. Essays from the International
Conference on the History, Function and Study of Watermarks, Roanoke: Virginia, 1996, ed.
Daniel Wayne Mosser, Michael Saffle, and Ernest W. Sullivan, 107–24. New Castle, DE:
Oak Knoll Press/British Library.
Sigismondo, Giuseppe. 1820. Apoteosi della musica del Regno di Napoli in tre ultimi transundati
Secoli. MS, 4 vols. Berlin: Staatsbibliothek.
Simms, Brian Randolph. 1975. “Choron, Fétis and the Theory of Tonality.” Journal of Music
Theory 19: 112–38.
Tomeoni, Florido. 1798. Méthode qui apprend la connoissance de l’harmonie et la pratique de
l’accompagnement selon les principes de l’école de Naples. . . . Paris: Chez l’auteur.
———. 1800. Traité d’harmonie et d’accompagnement selon les principes de Durante et Leo, fondateurs
de l’harmonie dans les conservatoires de Naples par Florido Tomeoni, Elève de l’Ecole de Durante.
Paris: Chez l’auteur, Faubourg St. Denis, N. 12 et chez les M.ds de Musique.

Rosa Cafiero is researcher in history of music and musicology at the Università Cattolica del Sacro
Cuore in Milan. She is the author of numerous essays on the history of Italian music theory in the
eighteenth and nineteenth centuries. 

159

