Clifton Callender
College of Music, Florida State University.

Ian Quinn
Music Department, Yale University.

Dmitri Tymoczko
Music Department, Princeton University.
To whom correspondence should be addressed.

All three authors contributed equally to this report.

GENERALIZED VOICE-LEADING SPACES

SUMMARY: We translate basic concepts of music theory into the language of
contemporary geometry.

ABSTRACT: Western musicians traditionally classify pitch sequences by disregarding
the effects of five musical transformations: octave shift, permutation, transposition,
inversion, and cardinality change. Here we model this process mathematically, showing
that it produces 32 equivalence relations on chords, 243 equivalence relations on chord
sequences, and 32 families of geometrical quotient spaces, in which both chords and
chord-sequences are represented. This model reveals connections between musictheoretical concepts, yields new analytical tools, unifies existing geometrical
representations, and suggests a way to understand similarity between chord-types.

To interpret music is to ignore information. A capable musician can understand the
sequence of notes (C4, E4, G4) in various ways: as an ordered pitch sequence (an
“ascending C-major arpeggio starting on middle C”), an unordered collection of octavefree note-types (a “C major chord”), an unordered collection of octave-free note-types
modulo transposition (a “major chord”), and so on. Musicians commonly abstract away
from five types of information: the octave in which notes appear, their order, their
specific pitch level, whether a sequence appears “rightside up” or “upside down”
(inverted), and the number of times a note appears. Different purposes require different
information; consequently, there is no one optimal degree of abstraction.
Here we model this process. We represent pitches using the logarithms of their
fundamental frequencies, setting middle C at 60 and the octave equal to 12. A musical
object is a sequence of pitches ordered in time or by instrument (1): the object (C4, E4,
G4) can represent consecutive pitches played by a single instrument, or a simultaneous
event in which the first instrument plays C4, the second E4 and the third G4. (Instruments
can be ordered arbitrarily.) Musicians generate equivalence classes (2, 3) of objects by
ignoring five kinds of transformation: octave shifts (O), which move any note in an
object into any other octave; permutations (P), which reorder an object; transpositions
(T), which move all the notes in an object in the same direction by the same amount;
inversions (I), which turn an object “upside down”; and cardinality changes (C), which
insert duplications into an object (4) (fig. S1, Table 1). (Note that O operations can move
just one of an object’s notes, while T operations move all notes.) We can form
equivalence relations using any combination of the OPTIC operations, yielding 25 = 32
possibilities.
A musical progression is an ordered sequence of musical objects. Let F be a
collection of musical transformations, with f, f1,…, fn

F . The progression (p1, …, pn) is

uniformly F-equivalent to (f(p1), …, f(pn)) and individually F-equivalent to (f1(p1), …,
fn(pn)). Uniform equivalence uses a single operation to transform each object in the first
2

progression into the corresponding object in the second; individual equivalence may
apply different operations to a progression’s objects (fig. S2). The OPTIC operations can
be applied uniformly, individually, or not at all, yielding 35 = 243 equivalence relations
on progressions.
A number of traditional music-theoretical concepts can be understood in this way,
including “chord” (OPC), “chord type” (OPTC), “set class” (OPTIC), “chordprogression” (individual OPC), “voice leading” (uniform OP), “pitch class” (single notes
under O), and many others (table S1, 4). We can also combine OPTIC operations in new
ways, producing new music-theoretical tools. For example, analogues to voice leadings
connect the elements of one chord type (or set class) to those of another; these are “OPT
(or OPTI) voice-leading classes,” resulting from the application of uniform OP (or OPI)
and individual T (1, 5) (Fig. 1). These equivalence relations can reveal connections
within and across musical works, and can simplify the analysis of voice leading by
grouping the large number of possibilities into more manageable categories.
Geometrically, a musical object can be represented as a point in Rn. The four OPTI
equivalences create quotient spaces by identifying (or “gluing together”) points in Rn
(fig. S3). Octave equivalence identifies pitches p and p + 12, transforming Rn into the ntorus Tn. Transpositional equivalence identifies points in Rn with their (Euclidean)
orthogonal projections onto the hyperplane containing chords summing to 0. This
transforms Rn into Rn–1, creating a “barycentric coordinate system” in the quotient (basis
vectors pointing from the barycenter of a regular n-simplex to its vertices). Permutation
equivalence identifies points in Rn with their reflections in the hyperplanes containing
chords with duplicate notes. Musical inversion is represented by geometric inversion
through the origin. Permutation and inversion create singular quotient spaces (orbifolds)
not locally Euclidean at their fixed points. C equivalence associates points in spaces of
different dimension: the result is the infinite-dimensional union of a series of “finite
subset spaces” (6–8).
3

One can apply any combination of the OPTI equivalences to Rn, yielding 24 = 16
quotient spaces for each dimension (Table 1); applying C produces 16 additional infinitedimensional quotients. Any ordered pair of points in any quotient space represents an
equivalence class of progressions related individually by the relevant combination of
OPTIC equivalences. The image of a line segment in Rn (a “line segment” in the
quotient, though it may “bounce off” a singularity [1, 9]) can be identified with an
equivalence class of progressions related uniformly by the relevant combination of OPIC
and individually by T. (This is because T acts by orthogonal projection.) Intuitively,
pairs of points represent successions between equivalence classes, considered as
indivisible harmonic wholes; line segments represent specific connections between their
elements.
Music theorists have proposed numerous geometrical models of musical structure
(fig. S4, table S3), many of which are regions of the spaces described in this report.
These models have often been incomplete, displaying only a portion of the available
chords or chord-types, and omitting singularities and other non-trivial geometrical and
topological features. Furthermore, they have been explored in isolation, without an
explanation of how they are derived or how they relate (10). Our model resolves these
issues by describing the complete family of continuous n-note spaces corresponding to
the 32 OPTIC equivalence relations.
Of these, the most useful are the OP, OPT, and OPTI spaces, representing voiceleading relations among chords, chord types, and set classes, respectively (4). The OP
spaces Tn/Sn (n-tori modulo the symmetric group) have been described previously (9).
The OPT space Tn-1/Sn is the quotient of an (n–1)-simplex, whose boundary is singular,
by the rigid transformation cyclically permuting its vertices (4). The OPTI space
Tn-1/(Sn

Z2) is the quotient of the resulting space by an additional reflection. These

spaces can be visualized as oblique cones over quotients of the (n–2)-sphere, albeit with
additional orbifold points. The singular point at the cone’s “vertex” contains the chord4

type that divides the octave into n equal pieces; the more closely a chord-type’s notes
cluster together, the farther it is from this point. The singular base of conical OPT space
can be visualized as the quotient of the (n–2)-sphere by the cyclic group Zn. (When n is
prime, this is a lens space; when n is not prime, it does not in general seem to have a
familiar name.) The base acts like a mirror, containing chords with note duplications.
The OPTI-spaces Tn-1/(Sn

Z2) are essentially similar: they can be visualized as cones

over the quotients of the (n–2)-sphere by the dihedral group Zn

Z2, with Z2

representing central inversion.
Figure 2A depicts T2/S3, the space of three-note chord-types (OPT equivalence
classes). The augmented triad at the vertex, 048, divides the octave perfectly evenly;
major and minor triads, 047 and 037, are found near the tip, and are the basic sonorities
of Western tonality. The triple unison 000 occupies the “kink” in the cone’s singular
base, which acts like a mirror. Orthogonal projection creates a barycentric coordinate
system, seen here as a triangular grid (1). Pairs of points represent successions of chord
types, while line segments represent “OPT voice-leading classes” (Fig. 1). Figure 2B is
T2/(S3

Z2), the quotient of the cone by a reflection. Here points are OPTI equivalence

classes (set classes), line segments are OPTI voice-leading classes, and all three
boundaries act like mirrors. Figure S5 depicts the analogous four-note structures. Since
the spaces are conical, some line-segments near the vertex will self-intersect; musically,
this means that nearly-even chords can be linked to their transpositions by efficient voice
leading (4).
The advantage of these constructions is that they permit a continuous generalization
of traditional music-theoretical terminology. Informal musical discourse recognizes
degrees of relatedness: equal-tempered and a just-intonation major triads are considered
highly similar, even though they are not related by any OPTIC transformations.
Likewise, composers often use scales in which “scalar transposition” (translation along a
scale, 4) is approximately equal to log-frequency transposition: in such scales, fragments
5

such as C-D-E (“Do, a deer”) and D-E-F (“Re, a drop”) are considered similar, even
though they are not OPTIC-equivalent. Traditional music theory, however, has often
adopted a binary approach to classification: chords are considered equivalent if they can
be related by OPTIC transformations, and are considered unrelated otherwise (2).
Several theorists have recently criticized this view, and modeling similarity between
chord types is an active area of music-theoretical research (4, 11). However, no existing
model describes the broad flexibility inherent in ordinary musical terminology: for
example, none explains the similarity between just and equal-tempered major triads.
Our spaces suggest such a measure. Nearby points represent equivalence classes
whose members can be linked by small voice leadings; in this sense, they are nearly
equivalent modulo the relevant equivalence relation. This model is in good accord with
traditional musical practice. Figure 3 shows that the traditional musical term “scale
fragment” refers to a small region of the graph of equal-tempered chords in three-note
conical OPT space (T2/S3); likewise, the term “triad” refers to a region of the equaltempered graph surrounding the vertex. Because the various tunings of the major triad lie
very close together in T2/S3, the term “major triad” can be taken to refer to an even
smaller region of the continuous space.
Geometrical representations of musical relatedness can also be useful in specific
analytical contexts. Fig. 3B shows three fragments from an early Schoenberg piano
piece, which traditional theory would consider to be unrelated. Some theorists (12) have
noted that the fragments can be understood as variations on the same musical idea.
Following Straus (13), we can model Schoenberg’s variations geometrically: Figure 3A
shows that the fragments define a sequence of short moves in T2/S3, each producing small
changes in the motive’s basic intervals. Similar analytical techniques can be used to
compare progressions, rather than isolated chords (4). Because the OPTIC spaces are
continuous, these techniques can potentially be applied to non-Western and microtonal
music as well.
6

Beyond modeling musical similarity, the geometrical perspective provides a unified
framework for investigating a wide range of contemporary music-theoretical topics,
including “contour” and “K-nets” (4, 14, 15). This is not surprising, as the OPTIC
equivalences have been central to Western musical discourse since at least the
seventeenth century (16). Our model translates these music-theoretical terms into precise
geometrical language, revealing a rich set of mathematical consequences. This
translation may have implications for theory, analysis, pedagogy, composition, musical
data analysis and visualization, and perhaps even the design of new musical instruments.

7

Equivalence Relation

Space
Rn

None
Octave

x ~O x + 12i, i

Zn

Tn

Transposition

x ~T x + c1, c

R

Rn-1 or Tn-1 [if in conjunction with O]
(orthogonal projection creates a barycentric
coordinate system)

Permutation

x ~P (x),

Sn

Inversion

x ~I –x

Cardinality

add /Sn
Add /Z2 [or /(Sn

(…, xi, xi+1 …) ~C

Z2) if in conjunction with P]

Infinite dimensional “Ran space”

(…, xi, xi, xi+1 …)

Table 1. Equivalence relations and quotient spaces produced by the five principal
transformations in Western music theory. Here, x is a point in Rn, 1 represents
(1, …, 1), and Sn is the symmetric group of order n.

8

A

B

& œ œ #œ œ
œ œ # œ œ
? bœ œ #œ œ

C

D

œ
bœ œ
œ

œ #œ
œ œ

E

F

œ bœ bœ #œ
œ œ œ œ

œ œ & #œ nœ #œ bœ bœ nœ
œ œ œ œ œ œ

Figure 1. Progressions belonging to the same OPT and OPTI voice-leading
classes. Each group exhibits the same underlying voice-leading structure:
analogous elements in the first chord are connected to analogous elements in the
second, and the distances moved by the voices are equal up to an additive
constant. (A) A iv6-V7 progression from Mozart s C minor fantasy, K. 457, mm.
13-14 (B) A progression from mm. 15-16 of the same piece, individually Trelated to (A). (C) A progression from Beethoven s Ninth Symphony, I, m. 102,
related to (A) by individual T and uniform OPI. (D) A common voice leading
between fifth-related dominant-seventh chords. (E) A common voice leading
between tritone-related dominant-seventh chords, related to (D) by individual T.
(F) A voice leading between tritone-related half-diminished sevenths, related to
(D) by individual T and uniform I.

9

A

B

Figure 2. A. T2/S3 is a cone. B. T2/(S3

Z2) is a triangle. Numbers refer to pitch

classes, with 0 = C, 1 = Cs, etc. Points represent equivalence classes of
transpositionally (A) or transpositionally and inversionally (B) related chords.
Thus, (C, D, E) and (D, E, Fs) are both instances of 024.

10

A

mt

et

just
026
014

015

Schoenberg

B

& œ #œ nœ œ œ œ #œ œ
œ

Figure 3. A. The cone T2/S3 (Fig. 2A) as seen from above. The term “scale
fragment” refers to grid points in the leftmost circle: “Do, Re, Mi” is 024, “Re, Mi,
Fa” is 023, and “Mi, Fa, Sol” is 013. “Triad” refers to points in the larger circle on
the right, containing major (047), minor (037), augmented (048), and diminished
(036) chords. Different tunings of the major triad are found in the dotted circle
around 047. On the right, the equal-tempered, just, and quarter-comma
meantone triads. B. Closely-related motives at the beginning of Schoenberg s
Opus 11, no. 1. The variations define a pair of short line segments in the cone,
from 014 to 015 to 026.

11

REFERENCES AND NOTES

1. C. Callender, Mus. Theory Online 10.3 (2004).
2. D. Lewin, Generalized Musical Intervals and Transformations (Yale, New Haven,
1987).
3. G. Mazzola, The Topos of Music (Birkhäuser, Boston, 2002).
4. Materials and methods are available as supporting material on Science Online.
5. D. Tymoczko, paper presented to the Society for Music Theory (2004).
6. R. Bott, Fund. Math. 39, 264, (1952).
7. C. Tuffley, Alg. and Geom. Top. 2, 1119 (2002).
8. Z. Ran, Internat. Math Res. Notices 4, 93 (1993)
9. D. Tymoczko, Science 313, 72 (2006).
10. R. Cohn, Mus. Theory Online 9.4 (2003).
11. I. Quinn, Perspect. New Mus. 39, 108 (2001).
12. E. Haimo, Mus. Theory Spectrum 18.2 (1996).
13. J. Straus, Mus. Theory Spectrum 25, 305 (2003).
14. R. Morris, Mus. Theory Spectrum, 15, 205 (1993).
15. H. Klumpenhouwer, thesis, Harvard University (1991).
16. J. P. Rameau, Treatise on Harmony (Dover, New York, 1971).
17. We thank J. Ellenberg, N. Elkies, D. Gaitsgory, and L. Ramshaw.

Supporting Online Material
Materials and Methods
Figs. S1 to S19
Tables S1 to S3
References

12

SUPPORTING ONLINE MATERIAL
TABLE OF CONTENTS
1. Notation
2. Chords, set classes, voice leadings and chord-progressions
3. Equivalence classes, quotient spaces, and music
4. Proto-metrics and isometries
5. Quotient spaces, fundamental domains, OPT, and OPTI
6. Voice leading in conical OPT space
7. Similarity between chord types
8. Contour
9. Larger equivalence classes: lines, planes, and K-nets
10. Supplementary Figures
11. Supplementary Tables
12. References and Notes

1
2
3
5
7
10
13
15
16
20
45
49

1. Notation. C4 is middle C, C5 is an octave above middle C, and so on; B3 is a semitone
below C4. R denotes the real numbers, Z the integers, Tn the n-torus, and Sn the
symmetric group of order n. Tx denotes transposition by x semitones: Tx(p) = p + x. Ix
y
denotes the reflection that maps x to y: Ix (p) = (x + y) – p.
y
We use subscripts to denote equivalence classes: (x1, …, xn)F denotes the
equivalence class formed by applying the musical operations in F to the musical object
(x1, …, xn). Thus (E4, G4, C4), (G2, G3, D5, B3)

(C4, E4, G4)OPTC. For progressions, we

use (x1, …, xn)F (y1, …, yn)F to denote the equivalence class resulting from individual
applications of F, and (x1, …, xn)

F

(y1, …, yn) to denote the equivalence class resulting

from uniform applications of F. The two notations can be combined: thus (C4, E4, G4)
OPI

(C4, F4, A4)T denotes the equivalence class of progressions related to (C4, E4, G4)

(C4, F4, A4) by individual T and uniform OPI (S1).
Note that there is a difference between the O and T operations: T operations send
the pitches (x1, …, xn) to (x1 + c, …, xn + c), for some real number c, while O operations
send (x1, …, xn) to (x1 + 12i1, …, xn + 12in) for some collection of integers ij. (These
definitions reflect musical practice.) One could say that T acts “uniformly” on the notes
in an object, while O acts “individually.” In this paper, however, we use the terms

1

“uniform” and “individual” only for progressions. Both O and T can apply to
progressions either uniformly or individually.
The term “scalar transposition,” used briefly in the main text, refers to
transposition or translation along a scale. Given the ascending circular ordering of pitchclasses (C, D, E, F, G, A, B, [C]), scalar transposition by one ascending step sends
(C, D, E) to (D, E, F), shifting every note upward by one scale tone. We can interpret a
scale as defining a metric according to which adjacent scale tones are one “unit” apart;
scalar transposition is just translation relative to this metric (S2).

2. Chords, set classes, voice leadings and chord-progressions. A “pitch class” is an
equivalence class of one-note objects related by O. Pitch classes can be designated by
letter names like “C” and “A” without an Arabic subscript identifying a particular octave.
A “chord” is an equivalence class of objects related by OPC. Chords can be identified
with unordered sets of pitch classes, and are often called “sets” in contemporary theory.
A “chord type” (or “transpositional set class”) is an equivalence class of objects related
by OPTC. Terms like “major chord” and “dominant seventh chord” refer to chord types
(S3). A “set class” is an equivalence class of objects related by OPTIC. Set classes have
long been central to music theory: for example, Rameau used the term “perfect chord” to
refer to the set class containing major and minor triads (S4).
The progression (C4, E4, G4) (C4, F4, A4) defines three melodic voices that move
C4 to C4, E4 to F4, and G4 to A4 (Fig. S2A). Theorists are often uninterested in the overall
order of the voices. A voice leading in pitch space is an equivalence class of
progressions under uniform permutation: (C4, E4, G4) (C4, F4, A4) and (E4, G4, C4)
(F4, A4, C4) are instances of the same voice leading in pitch space, (C4, E4, G4)

P

(C4, F4, A4). Theorists also find it useful to abstract away from the particular octave in
which voices appear. A voice leading in pitch-class space is an equivalence class of
progressions under uniform permutation and octave shifts: (C4, E4, G4) (C4, F4, A4) and
(E2, C5, G3) (F2, C5, A3) represent the same voice leading in pitch class space,
(C4, E4, G4)

OP

(C4, F4, A4). Here, C moves to C by 0 semitones, E moves to F by 1

semitone, and G moves to A by 2 semitones.

2

A “chord-progression” is a progression with no implied mappings between its
objects’ elements. (Note the hyphen: chord-progressions are a particular subspecies of
progression.) Chord-progressions can be modeled as equivalence classes under
individual applications of OPC: thus (C4, E4, G4) (F4, F3, A4, C5) and (E4, C4, G5)
(F4, C4, A5) are instances of the chord-progression (C4, E4, G4)OPC (F4, A4, C5)OPC.
Intuitively, chord-progressions represent sequences of chords considered as indivisible,
harmonic “wholes,” while voice leadings represent specific connections between the
notes of successive chords. The difference between chord-progressions and voice
leadings illustrates the difference between individual and uniform applications of the
OPTIC operations.
Hugo Riemann classified triadic chord-progressions by uniform TI and individual
OPC (S5). Thus he used a single term, Quintschritt, to label the progressions (C4, E4, G4)
(G4, B4, D5) and (C4, Ef4, G4) (F3, Af3, C4), even though the first progression ascends
by fifth, while the second descends by fifth. We can generalize Riemann’s terminology
by saying that two progressions are dualistically equivalent if they are related by uniform
TI and individual OPC.

3. Equivalence classes, quotient spaces, and music. A number of theorists (S6–7) have
investigated the role of symmetries and equivalence classes in music theory. The present
paper builds on this previous work in several ways: first, it describes a collection of five
OPTIC transformations intrinsic to traditional musical discourse; second, it shows how to
apply these transformations to progressions as well as individual objects; third, it
identifies a particular class of quotient spaces in which natural geometrical structures
correspond to familiar musical objects; fourth, it describes the specific geometry,
topology, and musical interpretation of the resulting spaces; and fifth, it uses voice
leading to reinterpret a variety of other music-theoretical terms, such as similarity,
contour, and K-nets.
Progressions are atomic fragments of musical scores (Fig. S6). In the sixteen
OPTI quotient spaces, there is an isomorphism between these fragments and a natural
class of geometrical objects: for any atomic fragment of a musical score, such as that in

3

Figure S6A, there is a unique line segment (or pair of points) in the quotient, such as that
in Figure S6C; conversely, for any line segment (or pair of points) in the quotient, there
will be a corresponding equivalence class of atomic fragments.
This is not true of musical quotient spaces in general. For example, suppose one
were to model equal-tempered pitch-classes as elements of the cyclic group Z12 and twonote chords as points in the discrete quotient space ((Z12)2 – Z12)/S2. (We use ((Z12)2 –
Z12)/S2 because the music-theoretical tradition ignores “chords” with multiple copies of a
single pitch class, such as {C, C}.) Now consider the two progressions shown in Fig
S6A-B. In two-note OP space, T2/S2, these are represented by distinct paths (Fig S6C):
one moves directly from {D, E} to {Ds, E}, while the other reflects off the space’s
singular boundary. However, the discrete space ((Z12)2 – Z12)/S2 does not distinguish
these progressions, for three reasons. First, there are no line-segments in the discrete
space. Second, chords such as {C, C} do not appear in ((Z12)2 – Z12)/S2, and hence there
is no singular boundary to “bounce off.” Thus, the line segment (D, E) (E, Ds) is not
represented even in T2/S2 – T1, the continuous noncompact Möbius strip representing
two-note chords with two distinct pitch classes. Third, the path in Figure S6B intersects
the singular boundary at a point with non-integral coordinates: thus, even if we were to
use the space (Z12)2/S2, which has singular points, and even if we were to define a
discrete analogue to the notion of “line segment,” it would still be awkward to model this
path.
Other musical quotient spaces create analogous complications (S8). In general,
the most transparent isomorphism between familiar musical events and familiar
geometrical concepts is obtained when pitches are modeled using real numbers, and when
multisets such as {C, C, E, G} are included. Furthermore, as we will see in the next
section, distances in the resulting spaces represent voice-leading size only when the
operations that form the quotient are isometries of generic voice-leading metrics. Our
suggestion is that the OPTI spaces are interesting precisely because they satisfy these
conditions, thereby giving rise to geometrical structures with a particularly clear musical
interpretation.

4

4. Proto-metrics and isometries. There are several ways to measure musical distance.
For example one could consider the notes C3 and G4 to be close because the ratio of their
fundamental frequencies can be expressed using small whole numbers. This is an
acoustic conception of musical distance. Alternatively, one could consider the chords
(C, Cs, E, Fs)OP and (C, Cs, Ds, G)OP to be close, or even identical, since each contains
the same total collection of intervals: a semitone (C-Cs), a major second (E-Fs and CsDs), a minor third (Cs-E and C-Ds), and so on. This is an intervallic conception of
musical distance (S9). Finally, it is important to distinguish perceptual models of musical
distance, which focus on the experience of hearing music, from conceptual models,
which attempt to describe more abstract cognitive structures musicians use to understand
or compose music.
In this paper, we explore a conceptual model that measures distance melodically,
using distance in log-frequency space (S10–11). Melodic distance is important for two
reasons: first, because large melodic leaps can often be difficult to sing or play; and
second, because short melodic distance facilitates auditory streaming, or the separation of
the sound-stimulus into independent melodic lines (S12–13). As a result Western
composers typically move from chord to chord in a way that minimizes the log-frequency
distance traveled by each voice (S2, S14–16). What complicates matters is that Western
polyphonic music involves multiple melodies at one time. Thus if one wants to measure
the melodic distance between chords, it is necessary to determine whether the voice
leading (C4, E4, G4)

OP

(Df4, F4, Af4), which moves three voices by one semitone each,

is larger or smaller than (C4, E4, G4)

OP

(C4, E4, A4), which moves one voice by two

semitones. The problem is that there is no obvious answer to this question: instead, there
are a number of reasonable but subtly different ways to measure voice leading.
Let A B

(a1, a2, …, an) (b1, b2, …, bn) be a progression of two n-note

musical objects. We define this progression’s displacement multiset as {|a1 – b1|, …,
|an – bn|}, or dm(A B). A proto-metric is a preorder over multisets of nonnegative reals
satisfying what Tymoczko (S2) calls the “distribution constraint”:

{x1 + c, x2, ..., xn}

{x1, x2 + c, ..., xn}

{x1, x2, ..., xn}, for x1 > x2, c > 0

5

A proto-metric allows comparison of some distances in Rn, thereby endowing the space
with more-than-topological, but less-than-geometrical structure. It is argued in (S2) that
any music-theoretically reasonable method of measuring voice leading must be consistent
with the distribution constraint, since otherwise voice leadings with “voice crossings”
would be smaller than their naturally uncrossed alternatives. Furthermore, every existing
music-theoretical method of measuring voice leading satisfies the constraint.
Uniform application of the OPTI symmetries preserves the displacement multiset
{|a1 – b1|, …, |an – bn|} and hence preserves the proto-metric: if F is any OPTI operation,
then dm(F(A) F(B)) = dm(A B); thus A B is smaller than C D if and only if
F(A) F(B) is smaller than F(C) F(D). Consequently, quotients of the OPTI
operations inherit the proto-geometrical structure of the parent space Rn. For a large
class of suitable metrics, this means that distance in the quotient space will correspond to
the length of the shortest line-segment between two points, as measured using the
quotient metric (S17). Musically, this means that we can use voice-leading size to
measure distance between chord-types.
The C operation does not have this property, since it identifies the voice leading
C4 G4, whose displacement multiset is {7}, with the voice leading (C4, C4, C4)
(G4, G4, G4), whose displacement multiset is {7, 7, 7}. According to most musictheoretical metrics {7} and {7, 7, 7} do not have the same size: this is because it takes
less musical “work” to move one voice by seven semitones than to move three voices by
seven semitones. Consequently, the C operation is not an isometry of proto-metrics in
general (S18).
This problem arises even in contexts that do not involve note duplication.
Consider a chord A consisting of a large number of distinct pitches infinitesimally close
to C4, and a chord B consisting of a large number of distinct pitches infinitesimally close
to G4. According to standard metrics of voice leading size, the voice leadings taking the
pitches of A to C4 and the pitches of B to G4 are infinitesimally small; the triangle
inequality therefore requires that the voice leading A B should be approximately the
same size as the voice leading C4 G4. But any voice leading from A to B must move a

6

large number of voices by approximately seven semitones each, and (according to many
standard metrics) is considerably larger than the voice leading C4 G4 (S19). Thus we
must either abandon the triangle inequality or abandon the claim that A B is
significantly larger than C4 G4. Either way, we abandon the idea that voice-leading size
corresponds to something like distance in the quotient space.
It follows that the C spaces are not ideal for studying voice leading, since we
cannot use distance in the C spaces to explain the efficient voice-leading possibilities
between chords. However, C spaces may usefully model similarity between chord types,
as we will discuss in §6. In this context, violations of the triangle inequality do not
necessarily present a serious music-theoretical obstacle.

5. Quotient spaces, fundamental domains, OPT, and OPTI. A quotient space is
formed by identifying (or “gluing together”) all points in a parent space related by some
collection of operations F. A fundamental domain for F is a region in the parent space
satisfying two constraints: first, every point in the entire space is related by operations in
F to some point in the region; and second, no two points in the interior of the region are
related by operations in F. (Typically, fundamental domains are also taken to be
connected regions with a straightforward geometrical structure, but this is largely a
matter of convenience.) The fundamental domain is analogous to a single “tile” of a
piece of wallpaper.
The quotient space can be formed from the fundamental domain by gluing
together all points on the fundamental domain’s boundary that are related by operations
in F. For example, the (closed) upper half plane is a fundamental domain for 180°
rotations in R2, since any point in the interior of the upper half-plane is related by 180°
rotation to a point in the lower half plane (Figure S7). Since points on the positive x axis
are related by 180° rotation to points on the negative x axis, they must be glued together
to form the quotient space. The result of this identification is a cone, as shown in Figure
S7.

7

We begin with Rn, the space of n-note musical objects. The O operation
transforms Rn into the n-torus Tn. Musically, the most useful fundamental domain for the
n-torus is an unusual one: those points (x1, x2, …, xn) such that

max(x1, …, xn)
0

min(x1, …, xn) + 12
xi

12

where “max” and “min” represent the maximum and minimum of a collection of
numbers, respectively. (See Table S2.) The first constraint ensures that the sequence of
pitches spans less than an octave; the second determines its overall registral position.
Intuitively, the resulting shape is a prism whose opposite faces are identified in a
“twisted” fashion (Fig. S8). The base of this prism is the shadow of an n-dimensional
hypercube orthogonally projected onto the (n–1)-dimensional plane containing points
whose coordinates sum to 0: in two dimensions it is a line segment; in three, a hexagon;
and in four, a rhombic dodecahedron. This fundamental domain is useful because
transposition corresponds to motion along the prism’s “height” dimension.
We can form a fundamental domain for the P operations by requiring that x1
…

x2

xn. This ensures that the object is in ascending order. We define a fundamental

domain for the T operations by requiring that xn = 0, thereby fixing a default
transposition for each object. A fundamental domain for the I operations is given by
x2 – x1

xn – xn–1 . This selects between an object (x1, …, xn) and its inversion

(–x1, …, –xn), choosing the one whose initial interval is smaller than its final interval.
Fundamental domains for combinations of the OPTI operations often combine the
relevant inequalities. However, the conjunction of O and T introduces additional
constraints. (For example, fundamental domains for OT must satisfy an equation like
min(x1, …, xn) = x1.) This is because the action of OT orthogonally projects a twisted
prism, producing a quotient of its cross-section (Fig. S8).
The OP space Tn/Sn has a fundamental domain that is a prism whose base is an
(n–1)-simplex. As shown in (S2), the space Tn/Sn is formed from the fundamental
domain by identifying points on the base with those on the opposite face (Figure S9).

8

(The rectangular boundaries of the fundamental domain in Figure S9A are singular
orbifold points, a matter we will disregard in the following discussion.) This
identification involves a “twist”—a rigid transformation cyclically permuting the
simplex’s vertices. OPT space Tn–1/Sn is the orthogonal projection of this space along the
direction of transposition, and is therefore the (n–1)-simplex modulo the “twist.” This
space can be visualized as a cone over a quotient of the (n–2)-sphere, since the simplex is
homeomorphic to a ball, which is itself a cone over the sphere. (Note, however, that this
“cone” will contain additional orbifold points with complicated topology: the vertex, the
base, and for chords with a nonprime number of notes, points on other layers as well.)
When n is prime, the group generated by cyclic permutation has no fixed points and the
base of Tn–1/Sn is a lens space (S20). Mathematically, transposition induces a foliation of
chord space (Tn/Sn), with chord-type space (Tn–1/Sn) being the “leaf space” of the
foliation.
Musically, the OPT spaces can be understood as a series of similar “layers,” each
of which contains the n-note chord-types whose smallest interval is some particular size.
The base of the cone contains chord-types whose smallest interval is size 0—i.e. chords
with note duplications. (These are all orbifold points acting like mirrors: images of linesegments in the parent space appear in the quotient to “bounce off” the base, much as a
ball bounces of the edge of the pool table [S2, S21–22].) The vertex is an orbifold point
representing the perfectly even chord-type that divides the octave into n equal pieces.
Figure S10 represents the equal-tempered layers of the cone in Figure 2A: these layers
are topological circles, and contain chords whose smallest interval is 0, 1, 2, 3, and 4
semitones respectively. The same pattern can be seen in Figure S5, which shows the
individual layers of T3/S4 containing chords whose smallest intervals are 0, 1, 2, and 3
semitones. Since four is a composite number, there are additional orbifold points within
each layer: for example, the point 0167 in Figure S5B is singular.
The OPTI spaces are quotients of these OPT spaces by the reflection that
identifies inversionally-related chord types. Since inversionally-related chord types share
the same smallest interval, the resulting space can again be visualized as a cone over a
quotient of the sphere. To form Figure 2B out of 2A, take the quotient of the cone by the

9

reflection that fixes 048 (the vertex), 000 (the “kink” in the base) and 006 (the point on
the base antipodal to the kink), as shown in Figure S9. This produces the triangle in
Figure 2B and S9E—a “cone” over the line segment from 000 to 006. Similarly, to form
Figure S5E out of Figure S5A identify each point with its geometrical inversion through
the center of the square. Three-note OPTI space was first described by Callender (S22)
while four-note OPTI space was partially described by Cohn (S23, fig. S4F), and
described more completely in unpublished work by Quinn. Interested readers can
explore these spaces further by downloading “ChordGeometries,” a free computer
program written by Dmitri Tymoczko (S24).

6. Voice leading, orbifold points, and conical OPT space. The description of OPT and
OPTI spaces as cones allows for a concise reformulation of one of the central conclusions
in (S2), that “nearly even” chords can be linked to their transpositions by efficient voice
leading. In conical OPT space, the “unevenness” of a chord corresponds to its distance
from the vertex. Nearly even chords can be linked to their transpositions by efficient
voice leading because short line segments near the vertex of a cone can self-intersect.
These self-intersecting line segments represent progressions combining harmonic
consistency (since they link transpositionally related chords) with efficient voice leading
(since they are short), two cardinal desiderata of traditional Western music (S2). Thus a
fact of central importance to Western music reduces to a familiar feature of the geometry
of cones.
In fact, there is a more general relation between voice leading and orbifold points.
To explore this, we will temporarily adopt the Euclidean voice-leading metric—
mathematically very convenient, because the voice leading A Tx(B)

(a0, …, an–1)

(b0 + x, …, bn–1 + x) is minimized when A and Tx(B) sum to the same value.
Furthermore, from the standpoint of the distribution constraint, the Euclidean metric is
nicely intermediate between the extremal cases of L1 and L (S25). Thus, results that are
exactly true in the Euclidean case will be approximately true for other metrics satisfying
the distribution constraint, with the accuracy of the approximation controlled by the
particular metric in question.

10

We begin with a simple theorem of Euclidean geometry. Let A be any vector and
let Bi be a collection of n vectors that add to zero. The sum of the squared Euclidean
distances |Bi – A| is equal to
|Bi – A|2 = |Bi |2 – 2 (Bi • A) + n|A|2 = |Bi|2 + n|A|2
since Bi = 0. When the Bi are all the same length, |B|, we have |A|2 + |B|2 = |A – Bi|2/n.
We now examine three cases where this fact has an interesting music-theoretical
interpretation. In each case, the lengths |A|2 and |B|2 will represent intrinsic properties of
chords A and B (such as their “evenness” or “spread”) while |A – Bi|2/n will represent
something about the voice-leading possibilities between them.
1. Unevenness and the size of the minimal voice-leadings between chord types.
Define the “unevenness” of a chord as the size of the minimal voice leading to the nearest
perfectly even chord. Let us translate the origin of OP space so that it lies at a perfectly
even chord (0, 12/n, …, 12(n–1)/n) , considering two chords A and B whose coordinates
xi (0

i

n – 1) sum to zero and obey the inequalities –12/n
2

xi + 1 (mod n) – xi < 12 – 12/n.

2

It follows that (1) the quantity |A| + |B| represents the sum of the squared
“unevennesses” of A and B; and (2) the voice leading A B will have no crossings, since
A and B each lie within the region bounded by chords with pitch-class duplications. Now
consider the n voice leadings

A

i

(B)

(a0, …, an-1) (b0 + i (mod n), …, bn-1+ i (mod n))

The n chords on the right of the voice leading have coordinates summing to 0, are the
same distance from the origin, and are related by transposition; they are also represented
by n vectors whose vector sum is zero. The voice leadings A

i

(B) have no crossings

and, for nonsingular A and B, are not individually T-related. (When both chords are in
nondescending order spanning less than an octave, we obtain them by repeatedly moving
the lowest note of the second chord up by octave, and transposing the entire chord down
by 12/n, as in Figure S11B.) Consequently, the quantity |A|2 + |B|2 = |A –

11

i

(B)|2/n

represents both the sum of the chords’ squared “evennesses” and the average squared size
of the crossing-free OPT voice-leading classes between chord-types AOPT and BOPT
(Figure S11A-C). For very even chords, such as the major and minor triads of the
classical tradition, there will be multiple small crossing-free voice-leading possibilities
between their transpositions. (Recall from §4 that crossing-free voice leadings are
desirable for a number of reasons, not least because there is always a minimal voice
leading between two chords that is crossing free.) This gives composers a wealth of
contrapuntal options to choose from.
2.“Spread” and the size of crossed voice-leadings between chords. A similar
result relates the size of voice leadings with crossings to the “spread” of two chords—that
is, their distance from the perfectly clustered chord-type {0, …, 0}T. Consider chords A
and B whose coordinates xi sum to zero. If the origin is the perfectly clustered chord,
then |A|2 + |B|2 represents the sum of the squared “spreads” of A and B. The n voice
leadings A

i

(B) are now obtained by circularly permuting the notes of the second

chord without any transposition (Fig. S11D). The average squared size of these voice
leadings will be equal to the sum of the chords’ “spread.” Thus a very clustered chord
can be connected to some transposition of another very clustered chord by many different
efficient voice leadings. The result can be generalized to all permutations of chord B.
3. Inversions. Choose an inversionally symmetrical sequence of pitch classes such
that (x1, …, xn) = (c – xn, …, c – x1), and translate the origin of OT so that it lies at this
point; thus, all chords B and –B are inversionally related. The quantities |A|2 and |B|2
represent the squared distance to the inversionally symmetrical chord at the origin. Our
result now says that the sum of these squared distances is equal to the average squared
size of the voice leadings A B and A –B. The closer A and B are to the inversionally
symmetrical chord midway between B and –B, the smaller these two voice leadings will
be.
In each of case, we find a similar relationship between voice leading and distance
from orbifold points. If we assume the Euclidean metric, we can express this relationship
in quantitative terms: the sum of the squared distances between two chords and some
particular orbifold point is equal to the average of the squared size of some musically

12

interesting collection of voice leadings between them. For an arbitrary metric obeying
the distribution constraint, there is no equivalently elegant quantitative result, but similar
relationships obtain approximately. Western composers have exploited these facts to
write progressions connecting structurally similar chords by efficient voice leading (S2).

7. Similarity among chord types. Over the last twenty years, a number of theorists have
attempted to model musical conceptions of “similarity” (or inverse distance) between
chord types. These models have been based on the intervallic conception of distance
described in §4 (S26–29), Fourier-transform-based extensions to these models (S9), the
prevalence of shared subsets (S30–33), or meta-analyses of models in these categories
(S34–35). Following Roeder (S36) and Straus (S37), we suggest an approach based on
voice leading: specifically, we propose modeling the similarity between equivalence
classes as the size of the smallest voice leading between their elements. Conceiving of
similarity in this way has a number of advantages:
1. As described in the text, this approach is consistent with the flexibility
inherent in terms such as “scale fragment,” “triad,” and “major triad.”
Furthermore, composers often do vary musical material in accordance with
this notion of similarity (Fig. 3).
2. Since this conception of similarity is consistent with aggregate physical
distance on a keyboard instrument, it is plausible that composers would be
sensitive to it.
3. This approach permits different chords to have different degrees of “self
similarity,” here measured by the size of the smallest nontrivial voice
leading from a chord-type to itself. Chord-types with a high degree of selfsimilarity have played a prominent role in Western music (S2).
4. This approach generalizes naturally to continuous spaces, in such a way that
chord-types differing by imperceptible distances are judged highly similar.
Furthermore, the approach provides similarity measurements that are
independent of the underlying chromatic universe. Other similarity metrics
(S26–S35) lack these properties.
5. Unlike intervallic similarity metrics (S9, S26–S29), this approach
distinguishes “Z-related” (or nontrivially homometric) chords such as
{C, Cs, E, Fs} and {C, Cs, Ds, G} which are often thought to be dissimilar.
6. There exist a range of OPTI quotient spaces modeling different degrees of
musical abstraction. Thus, unlike other metrics (S9, S26– S29), the
13

approach itself does not require one particular set of symmetries—such as,
for example, the identification of inversionally-related chords.
7. The approach generalizes naturally to measures of voice-leading similarity,
as will be discussed shortly.
We do not assert that voice-leading-based similarity metrics represent the only coherent
approach to the problem. However, we do suggest that the seven considerations adduced
above provide good reason to explore them.
Note that when modeling judgments of chord-type similarity it may be useful to
impose C equivalence: thus we may want to consider {C, C, E} and {C, E, E} to be
identical, and to consider{B, Cs, G} to be highly similar to{C, Fs, G}. (This is because
the two chords can be linked by the voice leading (B, Cs, G, G) (C, C, Fs, G), which is
both a nonbijective voice leading from {B, Cs, G}C to {C, Fs, G}C and a bijective voice
leading from {B, Cs, G, G} to {C, C, Fs, G}.) The fact that “distances” in the resulting
C-spaces do not obey the triangle inequality should not necessarily be a cause for alarm,
as there is no reason to expect psychological similarity judgments to be metrically wellbehaved (S38).
Infinite-dimensional C space is of course quite complex. Fortunately, in most
practical situations, the goal is to model relatively coarse-grained similarity judgments:
for example, to explain straightforward processes of musical variation such as that in
Figure 3B. In these contexts, it is often sufficient to work with a finite-dimensional OPT
or OPTI space. Furthermore, choosing a specific metric of voice leading size is often
unnecessary: the distribution constraint alone ensures that (E, F, A)OPT is as close to
(G, Gs, B)OPT as any other equal-tempered transpositional set class. Thus Schoenberg’s
process of melodic variation in Figure 3 is a series of minimal changes in equal-tempered
OPTIC space—no matter what measure of voice-leading size we prefer.
We can also use voice leading to measure the similarity of musical progressions:
one compares two-element progressions by parallel-transporting them so that they start at
the same point in the relevant quotient space; the distance between their endpoints
represents their relatedness. Figure S12A identifies two pairs of voice leadings in
Brahms’s Op. 116, no. 5, while Figure S12B models these voice leadings in T2/S2. If we
parallel transport the vectors in the most direct way (S12B), they nearly though not
14

exactly coincide. This reflects the intuitive sense that the gestures are closely, but not
exactly, related. However, the vectors can also be parallel transported so that they
exactly coincide (S12D), revealing a non-obvious symmetry in Brahms’s piece. The
symmetry is hard to spot in the musical notation, though it is obvious in the geometrical
representation. It is also fairly easy to hear: X1 and Y2 contain contrary motion where
both voices move by semitone, while X2 and Y1 contain contrary motion where one
voice moves by one semitone and the other moves by two semitones. Since the two pairs
of vectors are related by reflection, the figure also illustrates the Möbius strip’s
nonorientability.

8. Contour. T-space is divided into regions whose points share the same contour, or
ordinal ranking of their elements in pitch space. Figure S13 illustrates the threedimensional case, showing that the six regions are described by inequalities of the form
x

(1)

<x

(2)

<x

(3)

where

is a permutation. Music theorists have used these inequalities

to define equivalence classes, treating objects as contour-equivalent if they belong to the
same region (Fig. S13B) (S39). Elizabeth West Marvin has defined a “similarity metric”
for contours, equivalent (to within a linear function) to Kendall’s tau rank correlation
coefficient (S40–41). Geometrically, Marvin’s similarity metric counts the number of
half-spaces xi < xj containing both contours (Fig. S13C), divided by the total number of
sharable half-spaces (S42). The similarity between contours is a linearly decreasing
function of the smallest number of hyperplanes that must be traversed in moving between
their respective contour regions (Figure S13D).
Traditional models of musical contour sometimes deliver counterintuitive results.
For example, the passages in Figures S14A-B are contour-equivalent, since they both
begin with their lowest note, move to their highest note, and end with a note between the
first two. However, the resemblance between S14A and C is in some ways more striking
than that between A and B: the lowest two notes of A and C are quite close together,
which makes the difference in contour seem relatively unimportant. By contrast, since
the middle note of B is close to its upper note, its contour intuitively seems dissimilar to
that of A, even though they both exemplify the sequence low-high-middle. One can

15

capture these intuitions by individuating contours more finely, representing them as
normalized vectors in T space. Figure S14D shows that the vector representing A is
closer to that of C than that of B.
These ideas refine Quinn’s earlier extensions to Marvin’s theory of contours
(S43). Quinn was concerned with two problems: “averaging” a series of contours to
produce a composite representing the group’s general properties, and extending Marvin’s
similarity metric to these averaged contours. We can average a set of traditional contours
by associating each region with the unit vector ( (1), …, (n)) at its center (Fig. S14E).
These vectors can then be averaged using their (normalized) vector sum. (Alternatively if
we wish to individuate contours more finely, as unit vectors, we can average them
directly.) If we define an inner product on T-space (for instance, by using the Euclidean
norm to measure voice-leading size), then we can take the distance between these vectors
to be the angle between them (S44). Somewhat less elegant alternatives are available for
the other Lp norms.
It is also possible to represent sequences of notes as points in T-space, measuring
the similarity between them using a voice-leading metric. Thus, as illustrated in S15F,
our geometrical perspective provides a range of possibilities lying between traditional
pitch-set theory and traditional contour theory, depending on whether we represent
contours as points, rays, or regions of T-space. These represent progressive degrees of
abstraction from the musical surface.

9. Larger equivalence classes: lines, planes, and K-nets. Points in the OPTI spaces
represent musical objects, while line segments represent progressions. The question
naturally arises whether other geometrical entities—such as lines and planes—might
correspond to interesting music-theoretical ideas. Here we show that lines and planes
define larger equivalence classes known in the recent music-theoretical literature as “Knets.” This geometrical reinterpretation suggests a new and more general way to
understand these somewhat controversial objects.
A K-net (S45–47) is a twofold partition of a chord, written {a1} + {a2}. Pitch
classes in the same partition are interpreted as being related by transposition, while those

16

in opposite partitions are interpreted as being related by inversion (Fig. S15A-B) (S48).
A K-net thus determines a family of voice leadings that move the two partitions by exact
contrary motion (S49), leaving invariant the graph of transpositional and inversional
relations between the resulting notes (Figure S15C-D). For this reason, chords that can
be connected by such voice leadings are said to be “strongly isographic.” Strong
isography is useful for describing music in which exact contrary motion produces chords
of diverse harmonic character (Figure S15E-G).
Two K-nets {a1} + {a2} and {b1} + {b2} are “positively isographic” if a1 is
transpositionally related to b1 and a2 is transpositionally related to b2 (Figure S16A).
Similarly, they are “negatively isographic” if a1 is inversionally related to b1 and a2 is
inversionally related to b2. Positive and negative isography are useful for describing
music in which diverse chords are formed by superposing subsets that are
transpositionally or inversionally related (Fig. S16B). Note that “strong isography” is
primarily a contrapuntal notion, identifying pairs of chords that can be linked by a certain
kind of voice leading. “Positive” and “negative” isography are primarily harmonic,
referring to features of chord-structure that can be manifest even in music that does not
articulate distinct melodic voices.
Any K-net defines a line in OP space (a K-net line), containing strongly
isographic chords that can be reached by exact contrary motion of the two partitions
(Figure S17A). Two chords are related by <Tx> (“hyper Tx”) or < Ix > (“hyper Ix ”) if
y
y
they lie on K-net lines related by Tx or Ix respectively (S50–51). <Tx>-related chords are
y
positively isographic and project onto a line in OPT space containing all the chord-types
that can be formed by superimposing transpositions of the K-net’s two parts; <Ix >y
related chords project onto inversionally related lines in OPT space. (Chords project onto
a line in OPTI space only if they are either positively or negatively isographic.) Figure
S17 shows a K-net line in three-note OP space along with its projection in OPT space.
The figure shows that in twelve-note chromatic space, semitonal contrary motion reaches
only half of the positively isographic chord types. This is because, for example, moving
the two subsets {C} and {E, G} by semitonal contrary motion produces {Cs} and
{Ef, Gf}, thereby decreasing the distance between the singleton and the lowest note of

17

the minor third by two (S52). Consequently, in equal-tempered chromatic universes of
even cardinality, chords can be positively isographic even though no two of their (equaltempered) transpositions are strongly isographic. Remarkably, the traditional definition
of “positive isography” reflects this, even though the theory of K-nets was developed
without reference to geometry.
The geometrical perspective also suggests a natural generalization of K-nets. A
collection of chords or voice-leadings can be said to be strongly L-isographic if they lie
on a single line L in chord space (OP space). Such “generalized K-nets” can be used to
describe musical situations in which the same contrapuntal schema, not necessarily
purely contrary, links chords of different types. For example, Figure S18 shows a famous
classical-music pattern (the “omnibus progression”) that relates strongly L-isographic
chords. (The example cannot be analyzed using K-nets since the inner voices remain
stationary.) Here, the line L represents voice leadings in which the top voice moves up
by semitone and the bottom voice moves down by semitone (S53). Intuitively speaking,
a collection of chords is “strongly L-isographic” if repeated application of the same
contrapuntal schema will produce all the chords in that collection. Chords relate by
<Tx>L and are “positively L-isographic” if they lie on lines L and Tx(L); they relate by
< Ix >L and are “negatively L-isographic” if they lie on lines L and Ix (L ).
y
y
It is also possible to generalize to higher dimensions. A pair of linearly
independent voice leadings

,

defines a plane P in OP chord space (Figure
x
y

S19). Chords relate by <Tx>P or < I >P if they lie on planes P and P relating by Tx or Ix ,
y
respectively. (Again, chords are positively P-isographic if they relate by <Tx>P and are
negatively isographic if they relate by <Ix >P.) Philip Stoecker’s term “strong axial
y
isography” (S54) describes pairs of chords lying on one of these planes in three-note
chord space (Figure S19B-C); other theorists have generalized Stoecker’s idea to fournote chords (S55). One natural use of these ideas is to describe geometrical subspaces
containing chords that can be partitioned into subsets of the same type. For example,
Figure S5A illustrates the real projective plane formed by four-note chord-types of the
form {0, 0, a, b}OPT. (These are chord-types containing at least one “doubled” note.)
Chords belonging to these types are all strongly P-isographic, where P is a plane defined

18

by voice leadings (0, 0, a, b) (0, 0, a + , b) and (0, 0, a, b) (0, 0, a, b + ). Such
spaces can be useful in analyzing music where composers create chords by
superimposing sonorities of three fixed types.
K-nets are a notoriously difficult and even controversial topic (S56). There are,
perhaps, four reasons for this. First, previous discussion of K-nets used algebraic
language to describe objects that are more easily understood geometrically: lines and
planes in OP, OPT, and OPTI space. Second, previous discussions treat a special case of
a much more general phenomenon, considering only some of the lines and planes in the
relevant quotient spaces. Third, theorists have investigated K-nets in discrete 12-note
musical space, where the underlying relation between strong and positive isography is
obscured. And fourth, traditional theorists labeled the “hyper” transpositions and
inversions in ways that obscure their relation to ordinary transposition and inversion; as a
result, comparisons between these two forms of “transposition” are sometimes
problematic (S50, S51, S56). We hope that our geometrical reinterpretation of these
music-theoretical constructions leads to greater understanding of both their utility and
their limitations.

19

M
A

&

B

œ
œ œ
&
&

C

œ

œ

œ

œ

D

E

œ

œ

œ
œ

G

H

œ

œ
œ
œ

&

œ

œ

œ

?

œ

F

œ

#œ

œ

œ

œ

I

&

K

œ

œ

bœ

bœ

&

œ

œ

œ

&

œ

œ
#œ
œ

L

œ

J

œ

œ

œ

œ

œ

Figure S1. A musical object is a series of pitches, ordered in time or by instrument.
(Instruments are labeled arbitrarily.) (A) The object (C4, E4, G4) ordered in time. (B) The
object (C4, E4, G4) ordered by instrument (bottom to top). (C–E) Applying O operations
to (C4, E4, G4) yields (C4, E5, G4) (C), (C4, E4, G3) (D), (C3, E4, G5) (E), and so on. (F-G)
Applying P operations to (C4, E4, G4) yields (E4, G4, C4) (F), (G4, E4, C4) (G). (H-I)
Applying T operations to (C4, E4, G4) yields (D4, Fs4, A4) (H), (A4, Cs4, E5) (I). (J-K)
Applying I operations to (C4, E4, G4) yields (G4, Ef4, C4) (J), (C5, Af4, F4) (K). (L-M)
Applying C operations to (C4, E4, G4) yields (C4, C4, E4, G4) (L), (C4, E4, E4, G4) (M).

20

J
A

B

&œ œ

œ œ

&œ œ
&œ œ

œ

œ œ

?

œ œ

C

œ

œ
&

œ

D

E

F

G

œ œ

œ œ

œ œ

œ

œ œ

œ œ
œ
œ

œ œ

œ

K

œ œ

œ œ

H

I

œ #œ

œ bœ

œ bœ

œ œ

œ œ

#œ œ

œ œ

bœ œ

œ œ

œ œ

œ œ

œ œ

œ œ

œ œ

œ

œ œ

œ œ

bœ

Figure S2. A progression is a sequence of musical objects. (A) The progression
(C4, E4, G4) (C4, F4, A4), ordering instruments from bottom to top. (B) (C3, E5, G4)
(C3, F5, A4) relates to (A) by uniform octave shifts. (C) (C4, E5, G5) (C5, F3, A4) relates to
(A) by individual octave shifts. (D) (C4, G4, E4) (C4, A4, F4) relates to (A) by uniform
permutation. (E) (E4, C4, G4) (C4, A4, F4) relates to (A) by individual permutation. (F)
(D4, Fs4, A4) (D4, G4, B4) relates to (A) by uniform transposition. (G) (C4, E4, G4)
(B3, E4, Gs4) relates to (A) by individual transposition. (H) (G4, Ef4, C4) (G4, D4, Bf3)
relates to (A) by uniform inversion. (I) (C4, E4, G4) (Bf4, F4, Df4) relates to (A) by
individual inversion. (J) (C4, C4, E4, G4) (C4, C4, F4, A4) relates to (A) by uniform
cardinality change. (I) (C4, E4, E4, G4) (C4, F4, A4, A4) relates to (A) by individual
cardinality change. Note that uniform shifts typically preserve the identity of musical
voices while individual shifts typically do not.

21

sit

io

n

(a, b)

(a + 12, b)

tra

(a, b)

ns

0

po

pi

irs to
pa ing
ns m
ai m
nt su
co hes
tc

(a + 12, b + 12)

of

(a, b + 12)

second note

B

second note

A

(a/2 – b/2, b/2 – a/2)
first note

first note

c
of ont
pi ain
tc s
he pa
s ( ir
c, s
c)

(a, b)

second note

D

second note

C

(a, b)

(b, a)
first note

first note
(–a, –b)

Figure S3. Each of the four OPTI operations has a natural geometrical
interpretation. A. O identifies all points (a, b), (a + 12, b) and (a, b + 12).
B. T identifies points with their (Euclidean) orthogonal projections onto the
hyperplane containing chords whose pitches sum to 0. C. P identifies points with
their reflections in the subspaces containing chords with “duplicate” pitches: in
two dimensions, this is the line (x, x). In three dimensions, these are the planes
(x, x, y), (x, y, x), and (x, y, y). D. Finally, I operates by central inversion, sending
(x, y) to (–x, –y).

22

A

B

C

Figure S4. Recent geometrical
models of musical structure. All are
portions of the quotient spaces
described in this report. A. John
Roeder s “ordered interval space”
(S57) represents three-note OT
equivalence classes in T2, using the
coordinates (0, x, x + y). B. Jack
Douthett and Peter Steinbach s
“Cube Dance” (S58) is a graph
appearing in T3/S3. C. Joe Straus s
graph of single-semitone voice
leadings among three-note set
classes (S37) is a graph appearing
in T2/(S3 Z2). (continued on next
page)

23

D

E

Figure S4 (continued). D. Roiter s unpublished (1983) model of 3-note OT space,
showing its simplicial coordinate system. E. Erlich s unpublished (2000)
continuous model of 3-note OTI space, here coordinatized with frequency ratios.
Colors represent the consonance of the chords, as judged according to Erlich s
“harmonic entropy” model. (continued on next page)

24

Figure S4 (continued). F. Richard Cohn s graph of four-note OPTI equivalence
classes (S23) is a graph in a fundamental domain for T3/(S4 Z2). The 29 points
drawn here, six of which are drawn twice, correspond to the 29 points in Figure
S5F-H. Six points are drawn twice also in Figure S5, four in part F and two in
part G; but the choice of which six points to repeat has been made differently in
the two figures.

25

A

B

0048

0057

0066

0047

0056

0037

0046

0055

0036

0045

0025

0034

00e3

0002

0011

00e2

0001
0000

0093

00t2

00e1

0088

0134

0057
0046

0016

0023

0015
0014
0004

0013
0012

0006
0005

001e

0019

t125

0008

0257

024t
e249

0248
0247

0246

0369

0249
0248
e247

t248

9127
8127
9126

G

H

0000
000e

000t

0167

0158

0156

0007

0149
0148

0157
0147
0146

0137

0135
0134

013t

012e
012t

0139

0268

0129

0138

0136

0145

0003
0002

0259
0258

0066

0009

0018
0017

0026

0024

0011

0027

0025

0034

0022

t126

9128

0268

0076
0075

001t

0029
0028

0037

0035

0033

0038

0036

002t

0039

0048
0047

0045
0044

t128
t127

F

0056
0055

e124

t129

e128

e126
e125

e12t
e129

e127

0126

0124

E
0066

0128
0127

0125

012e
012t

0129

0138

0136

0123

0139

0137

0135

0077

0086
0085

0084

0145

0087

0096

0094

0099

0097

0147
0146

0098

00t7

0095

00t4

0156

00t9
00t8

00t6
00t5

00t3

00tt

00e9

00e7

0148

0157

013t

0149

0158

0167

00et

00e8

00e5
00e4

00ee

000t

00e6

0005

0003

0012

0007
0006

0004

0013

000e

0009
0008

0017
0016

0014

0023
0022

0018

D

0000

001e
001t

0019

0028

0015

0024

0033

002t
0029

0027
0026

0035

0044

0039
0038

C

0128

0257

0127
0126

0259

024t
0249

0258
0248

0369

0247
0246

0125
0124

0123

0001
0000

Figure S5. A-D. The space of four-note chord types, T3/S4, can be visualized as
a cone whose base is a real projective plane (A). However, this “cone” contains
additional orbifold points. (Here “t” = 10 and “e” = 11.) Every point is an OPT
equivalence class. The left and right edges of (A) are singular and act like
mirrors. The cone consists of a series of geometrically similar “layers.” E-H. The
space of four-note set-classes (OPTI equivalence classes) is T3/(S4 Z2), whose
layers are quotients of A-D by central inversion. (continued on next page)

26

J

I
0, c, 6, 6 + c

0, c, 6 – x, 6 + c + x

0, c, 2c, 3c

0, c, 6, 6 + c

0, c, 2c + x, 3c + x

0, c, 6 – x, 6 + c + x

0, c, 2c, 3c

0, c, 2c + x, 3c + x
0, c, 2c, 6 + c

0, c, 2c + x, 3c + x
0, c, 2c, 3c + x

0, c, 2c, 3c

0, c, 6 – x, 6 + c + x

0, c, 6, 6+c

0, c, 2c, 3c

K
0, c, 2c, 3c

Figure S5 (continued). I-J. A
schematic representation of the
layers in A-H. The structure of
each layer is determined by a
0, c, 2c + y, 3c + y
parameter, c, representing the
0, c, 2c, 3c + x
smallest interval in the chord.
Figures S5A–D correspond to c
0, c, 6 – x, 6 + c + x
0, c, 2c, 3c
0, c, 6, 6 + c
values of 0, 1, 2, and 3,
respectively. Note that these
coordinates represent OPT and
0, c, 2c + x, 3c + x
OPTI equivalence classes.
Thus, {0, 2, 4} and
0, c, 2c, 3c + x
{0, 2, 10} are both instances of
{0, 2, 4}. K. In A-D, it is clear
0, c, 2c, 3c
that the base of the cone is the
real projective plane. However,
this representation conceals the relation between line segments and voice
leadings: for instance, there is no voice leading corresponding to the line
segment (e, 1, 2, 7) (0, 1, 3, 7) in Figure S5B. (This is analogous to the fact
that, on Figure S10, there is no voice leading that follows an inner contour
through its “kink.”) For a representation in which line segments faithfully
represent voice leadings, we can depict the base as a triangle, as in Figure
S5K. Here, however, it is somewhat less obvious that the base of the cone is
a real projective plane. (continued on next page)

27

Figure S5 (continued). L. T3/S4, as seen from above. Figure S5K presents a
schematic view of each of the layers. Color indicates how evenly a chord
divides the octave, with the red chord (0369) being perfectly even, and the
deep blue chords (0000) being perfectly clustered. (continued on next page)

28

Figure S5 (continued). M. T3/(S4 Z2), seen from a side view. The layers
correspond to Figure S5E-H. This and the preceding image were made with
Dmitri Tymoczko s “ChordGeometries” program.

29

A

B

& œ œ œ #œ
œ #œ œ œ
?

C
B
CsCs

CC

CDf
BCs

CsD

CD

CEf

BfE

EGs

FAf
FG

GA

GAf
GG

AfBf

AfAf

AB

AA

AD

ACs

AC

ABf

GsA

DAf [EfA]

AfDf

GsB

[EGs]

EfAf

DG

AfC

GB

[FG]

EG

EfG

CsG

GC

GBf

FsA

GfAf

FsG
FsFs

GfBf

EfGf

DfGf

FsB

FGf
EFs

DFs

CFs

[FsFs]

FF

EfF

DfF

BF

FA

A

DF

CF

FBf

EA

CsE

BE

EE
DsE EF

DE

CE

BDs

BfEf
AEf

DEf

CsDs

BD
BfD

DD EfEf

BfDf

BfC

[BCs]
BC

AsB

BfBf

[BfD]

BB

[CC]

Figure S6. A–B. The progressions (D, E) (Ds, E) and (D, E) (E, Ds). C. The
line segments in T2/S2 corresponding to these progressions.

30

y

A

B

(a, b)

y

.

(a, b)

.

x
x

.

C

(a, b)

.

D
y

y

(–a, –b)

x

x
(–a, 0)

(a, 0)

Figure S7. Fundamental domains and quotient spaces. A. Every point in the
upper half plane is related by 180° rotation to a point in the lower half-plane. B.
The upper half plane (including the x axis) is therefore a fundamental domain for
the rotation. This fundamental domain is a region of R2, and does not possess any
unusual topological or geometrical properties. C. Fundamental domains are not in
general unique. Thus the right half-plane is also a fundamental domain for 180°
rotation. D. To transform a fundamental domain into the quotient space, it is
necessary to identify boundary points related by the symmetry operation. Here,
this requires gluing the positive x axis to the negative x axis so as to attach (a, 0) to
(–a, 0). The result is a cone. Though there are many fundamental domains, they
all produce the same quotient space upon identification of the appropriate
boundary points.

31

transposition
C (6, –6)

(12, 0) Aʹ
(11, 1) Eʹ

B (1, –1)
A (0, 0)
E (–1, 1)

(7, 5) Dʹ
(6, 6) Cʹ

D (–5, 5)
C (–6, 6)

(1, 11) Bʹ
(0, 12) Aʹ

Figure S8. A fundamental domain for the 2-torus T2. The top edge is glued to the
bottom, forming a cylinder. The left edge is then glued to the right so as to match
the appropriate chords. This is an unusual fundamental domain for the 2-torus, but
it has the advantage of clearly representing transposition, shown here as horizontal
motion.

32

IDENTIFY

A

GsGsGs

C
888

CCC

PROJECT

CEGs

transposition

EEE

B

048

444

000

GsGsGs

CCC
CEGs
EEE

D

048

[000]

000

E

000

048

006

Figure S9. A. Three-note chord space T3/S3 is a prism whose opposite faces are
identified by way of a 120° “twist,” matching CCC to CCC, EEE to EEE, and
GsGsGs to GsGsGs. Transposition is represented by vertical motion. To identify
transpositionally related points, take a cross section (B) of the prism and identify
all points related by 120° rotation (C). This produces a cone (D). To identify
inversionally related chord types, take the further quotient by reflection, as shown
in E.

33

Figure S10. Three-note OPT space (T2/S3) can be understood as a series of
similar “layers.” Here, the outermost layer contains chord-types whose smallest
interval is 0; the next layer contains chord-types whose smallest interval is 1, and
so on.

34

A
2
Squared unevenness: –
3

&œ

œ

& œ b b œœ
œ
T0

B

&œ

& œ b b œœ
œ
Squared size: 2

bœ

œ

œ bœ
œ œ
T–4

œ

D

8
–
3

Squared spread:

74
–
3

56
–
3

bœ

œ
œ

&œ

œ

œ bœ

œ bœ

bœ
œ

œ

& œ b b œœ
œ

œ bœ
œ œ

œ b œœ
œ

54

74

Squared size: 2

T–8

œ

œ

œ

œ #œ
œ œ

œ
œ

œ
œ

œ

6

2

E

(Ef4, G4, Df4)

C

2

1

(C4, E4, G4)
(Df4, Ef4, G4)

3

1

3
2

(G4, Df4, Ef4)

Figure S11. A. Beginning with a voice leading that does not touch the boundary
of OPT space, transform the second chord by successively transposing its
bottom note up by octave. B. Then consider the smallest voice leadings
individually T-related to these. If one is using the Euclidean metric, the resulting
voice leadings will connect chords summing to the same value, and their average
squared size will be equal to the sum of the squared “unevenness” of the two
original chords (here 10/3). (“Unevenness” is measured by the size of smallest
voice leading from a chord to the nearest chord dividing the octave perfectly
evenly.) C. In three-note OPT space, the three voice leadings in B represent
three different line segments between the same two points, none touching the
space s singular boundary. Their average squared length is equal to the sum of
their endpoints squared distances to the cone s vertex. D. Beginning with any
voice leading in pitch space, circularly permute the pitches of second chord.
Consider the smallest voice leadings individually T-related to these. (In the
example shown, these voice leadings are already as small as possible.) Using
the Euclidean metric, the average squared size of these voice leadings (here
130/3) will be equal to the sum of the squared “spread” of the two original chords.
(“Spread” is measured by the size of smallest voice leading from the original
chord to the nearest chord with just a single pitch class.) E. The three voice
leadings in D, shown in T-space.
35

A

B
X1

X2

&œ œ

œ #œ

? œ #œ

œ #œ

CsCs

CC

CDf

DD

EfEf
DEf

CsD

[FsFs]

FF
EF

FGf

CD CDs CsDs DE Y1 EfF
EFs [FG]
CsE
X1
DF EfGf
EG
BD

BfD

Y2

œ
& œ

DfF

CE

BDs

AEf

œ œ

? #œ #œ

CF

#œ œ

DFs

[EGs]

EfAf
DAf [EfA]

CsG

BF CFs

BfE

EfG

DG

DfGf

FBf
AfDf
AD
GC
FsB
GB Y2
X2
ACs [BfD]
AfC
FA
EGs
FsAs
BfDf
GBf GsB
FAf
AC
FsA
GfAf

AfBf

GA

GAf

FsG

AB

ABf

GsA

X2

&œ œ
? œ #œ

œ #œ

Y2

Y1

? #œ œ
& œ œ

AA

BfBf

BB

[CC]

CsCs

DD

EfEf

EE

FF

[FsFs]

CsD

DEf

DsE

EF

FGf

CD X1 CsDs DE Y1 EfF
EFs [FG]
CDs
CsE
DF EfGf
γ
BD
α
EG
BfD
CE DfF
DFs EfG [EGs]
BDs
BCs

#œ #œ
œ œ

AfAf

CDf

β

CF

BfEf BE
AEf BfE
EGs

DG

DfGf

BF CFs

FBf

X1 Y2

EfAf

[EfA]
CsG
β
DAf
GC
AfDf
AD

FsB
GB
[BfD]
Y2 AfC ACs
FA X2 FsAs
α
GBf GsB
AC
BfDf
FAf FsA

EA

γ

X2

BC

AsB

GG

CC

œ #œ

D

Y2

[BCs]

BfC

FsFs

X1

X1

EA

FG

C

Y1

BCs

BfEf BE

Y1

EE

DsE

FG

GfAf

GAf

FsG
FsFs

GA

GG

AfBf

ABf

GsA

AfAf

AB

AA

BfC

X2 Y1

BC

AsB

BfBf

[BCs]

BB

[CC]

Figure S12. A. Four voice-leadings from the opening of Brahms s Op. 116, no. 5:
X1 is similar to Y1 and X2 is similar to Y2. B. Graphing the voice leadings in the
Möbius strip representing two-note chords (T2/S2) shows that X1 and X2 can be
parallel-transported so as to nearly coincide with Y1 and Y2, respectively. C. X1
and X2 are also highly similar to Y2 and Y1, as can be seen by switching the two
hands. D. In T2/S2, X1 and X2 can be parallel transported to exactly coincide with
Y2 and Y1, respectively. This can be seen from the fact that the two pairs of
arrows are related by reflection.

36

A

B
x1 < x3 < x2

&

x3 < x1 < x2

x1 < x2 < x3

x3 < x2 < x1

x2 < x1 < x3

&œ

œ

œ

#œ

#œ

D
x1 < x3 < x2
x1 < x2 < x3

x3 < x2 < x1

œ

x1 < x3 < x2

x1 < x3 < x2
x3 < x1 < x2

œ

&œ

x2 < x3 < x1

C

œ

x2 < x1 < x3

x2 < x3 < x1

x1 < x2 < x3

x3 < x1 < x2

x3 < x2 < x1

x2 < x1 < x3

x2 < x3 < x1

Figure S13. A. T-space is divided into regions representing objects sharing the
same contour. B. Three musical objects sharing the contour x1 < x3 < x2. C.
Elizabeth West Marvin s “contour similarity index” is equal to the number of half
planes of the form xi < xj containing the two contours, divided by the maximum
number of potential matches. Here, the similarity of x1 < x3 < x2 and x1 < x2 < x3 is
equal to 2/3. D. The similarity of two contours is a linearly decreasing function of
the number of hyperplanes that need to be crossed in moving between their
respective regions.

37

œ
A &

œ

œ
bœ

B &œ
C &

x1 < x3 < x2

D

B

x3 < x1 < x2

œ

œ
œ

A

C

x1 < x2 < x3

x3 < x2 < x1

x2 < x1 < x3

#œ
x2 < x3 < x1

E

C

x3 < x1 < x2

F

x1 < x3 < x2

x1 < x3 < x2

γ

A

x1 < x2 < x3

x3 < x2 < x1

α1

x2 < x1 < x3

x2 < x3 < x1

β1

x3 < x1 < x2

C

x3 < x2 < x1

β2

x1 < x2 < x3

α2

γ

x2 < x1 < x3

x2 < x3 < x1

Figure S14. A-C. Contour A is in some ways more similar to C than B, even though
A and B both represent the sequence low-high-middle, while C represents middlehigh-low. D. We can individuate contours more finely by representing them as line
segments of unit length in T-space. In this representation, A is closer to C than B.
E. A contour region can be represented by the vector ( (1), (2), …, (n)) at its
center. These vectors can be averaged in the standard way. Here, represents the
average of the contours A (x1 < x3 < x2) and C (x3 < x1 < x2). F. The geometrical
perspective provides a range of theoretical abstractions. Contours can be
represented as points ( 1, 2), rays ( 1, 2) or regions ( ). Measures of voice-leading
size can be used to determine the distance between these objects.

38

A

B

C
T4

E

Gs

E

ID
Ef

Gs
A
IA

Bf

Bf

Df

Df

IE
F

E

IG
G

& #œ
œ
bœ
?b œ

F

G

& #œ
œ

œ
œ

& bœ
bœ

œ
œ

bœ œ
œ #œ
#œ œ
œ œ

œ ##œ œ bœ n#œ
œ œ œ œ œ
œ #œ nbœ œ bœ
œ œ œ #œ n œ

T3
D
T4
F
I

G
G

A
A
IA

ID
Ef

A

C

E
F

I

œ
œ
#œ n#œ nœ œ n#œ œ #œ nœ
œ
œ
# œ nœ ##œ ##œ nœ ##œ n nœ # œ
œ
œ œ #œ

œ
œ
œ
œ

?

bœ
œ
œ

nœ #œ
œ œ
bœ n œ

bœ nnœ
œ bœ
œ œ

bœ bnœ nœ
œ bœ n œ
œ œ œ

T3
Figure S15. A. A K-net is a chord partitioned into two parts. Here, the K-net
{Bf, Df} + {E, Gs} partitions {Bf, Df, E, Gs} into a major and minor third. B. Notes
in the same partition are interpreted as being related by transposition, while notes
in opposite partitions are interpreted as being related by inversion. C-D. A K-net
defines a collection of voice leadings in which the two parts move semitonally in
contrary motion. These voice leadings produce chords of many different types,
all of which share the same graph of transpositional and inversional relationships
(D). E-G. Exact contrary motion in Strauss s Till Eulenspiegel, Mozart s
Symphony no. 40, movement 1, and Messiaen s Vingt Regards, no. 20.

39

A

A

Cs

E

F

F

A

C

D

Fs

Fs

A

F

Gs

A
Gs

B
Winds, Pno.
3

3

3

3

4 œ œ œ œ œ œ
& 4 #œ #œ œ œ œ œ œ œ œ œ œ œ
Brass
> > >
œ œ œ
?4 Œ
&
4
Strings, Low brass

?4
4

w
w
>
A/F

> #œ
œ œ 3
3
˙
nœ
œ
œ # œ œ œ œ œ œ n œ œ œ # ˙ ...
œ
œ œ œ œ œ œ ˙.
˙
œ
œ œ nœ
j3
> >
œ ?œ œ œ
>
>3
œ
œ ‰
œ
œ
œ
œ&
œ
œ
œ
œ œ
>
>
>
j
#˙
œ ‰
#˙
œ œ
#œ
˙.
#œ
˙.
#œ
F/Fs D/Gs

#œ
œ
œ
œ
œ
#œ
œ
#œ

nœ #œ
œ œ
œ œ
œ œ
œ
nœ #œ
œ œ
œ #œ
nœ

œ
œ‰
œ
œ
J
œ
œ

j
#œ
œ‰Œ
#œ #œ œ
#œ

F/Gs

Figure S16. Chords in A are all strongly isographic because they can be
partitioned into a major triad and a single note. B. Movement 3 of Stravinsky s
Symphony of Psalms, m. 46-51. The passage contains the four chords in (A).

40

C

A

B

œ bœ nœ œ ##œ œ
œ œ œ
& œ bœ #nœ bœ #nœ œ ##œ œ n œ # œ
œ œ œ œ œ œ
œ
œ
? œ #œ nœ #œ nœ #œ nœ œ #œ nœ #œ nœ

C
033

035

037

013

014

Figure S17. A. A K-net defines a line in OP space. Here, the line contains the
equal-tempered chords shown in (B). (Major triads and diminished triads are
represented by the grey and black “target” patterns, respectively.) The line
reflects off the space s mirror boundaries, and hence appears to contain “kinks.”
C. The image of this K-net line in OPT space contains all three-note chord-types
with a minor third. The sequence in (B) skips every other equal-tempered chordtype on this line, thus avoiding chord-types such as 037 altogether.

41

A

& œœ # œœ œ
œ
L

?

#œ nœ
œ œ

œ
œ

œ #œ
œ œ

œ #œ
œ œ

œ #œ
œ œ

œ œ œ œ œ œ œ
œ #œ nœ #œ nœ #œ nœ

œ #œ
œ œ

œ œ œ
œ #œ nœ

T-3

& # œœ œ # œ
œ œ
T-3(L)

œ #œ
œ œ

œ
œ

œ #œ
œ œ

œ #œ
œ œ

œ
œ

œ
œ

#œ #œ #œ #œ #œ #œ #œ #œ #œ #œ #œ #œ
? # œ n œ # œ n œ # œ n œ œ #œ nœ #œ nœ
œ

B

T-3(L)

L

& œœ # œœ œ
œ
?

#œ nœ
œ œ

œ #œ #œ
œ œ œ

œ #œ
œ œ

œ œ œ œ œ œ
œ #œ nœ #œ nœ #œ

Figure S18. A. The “omnibus” pattern defines a line L in four-note chord space.
Chords on this line contain the notes {E, G} and have two other notes related by
inversion around B. Transposing these chords downward by three semitones
produces the line T-3(L). Chords on the top staff are therefore positively Lisographic to those on the bottom, and relate by the “hyper transposition” <T-3>L.
B. Classical composers often used the fact that both lines contain an A7 chord to
shift from one to the other.

42

A

α→β
L1

?

œ

œ #œ

œ

œ #œ

œ #œ

œ #œ bnœ #œ nœ
œ œ œ œ bœ

œ bbœ
œ œ

œ œ œ œ œ
œ #œ bnœ #œ bnœ

œ

œ

œ

œ

œ œ
œ bœ

œ
œ

œ œ
œ bœ

& œ #œ

œ #œ

α→γ

&œ
L2

?

œ
œ

œ

œ

œ œ
œ bœ

œ

œ

œ œ
œ bœ

œ

œ

œ

œ œ
œ bœ

voice leading α→γ

B
BE+G

BfE+G

AE+G

AfE+G

GE+G

GfE+G

FE+G

EE+G

EfE+G

DE+G

DfE+G

DfF+Gf

CF+Gf

BF+Gf

BfF+Gf

AF+Gf

AfF+Gf

GF+Gf

GfF+Gf

FF+Gf

EF+Gf

EfF+Gf

DF+Gf

DFs+F

DfFs+F

CFs+F

BFs+F

BfFs+F

AFs+F

AfFs+F

GFs+F

GfFs+F

FFs+F

EFs+F

EfFs+F

EfG+E

DG+E

DfG+E

CG+E

BG+E

BfG+E

AG+E

AfG+E

GG+E

GfG+E

FG+E

EG+E

EGs+Ef

EfGs+Ef

DGs+Ef

DfGs+Ef

CGs+Ef

BGs+Ef

BfGs+Ef

AGs+Ef

AfGs+Ef

GGs+Ef

GfGs+Ef

FGs+Ef

FA+D

EA+D

EfA+D

DA+D

DfA+D

CA+D

BA+D

BfA+D

AA+D

AfA+D

GA+D

GfA+D

GfBf+Df

FBf+Df

EBf+Df

EfBf+Df

DBf+Df

DfBf+Df

CBf+Df

BBf+Df

BfBf+Df

ABf+Df

AfBf+Df

GBf+Df

GB+C

GfB+C

FB+C

EB+C

EfB+C

DB+C

DfB+C

CB+C

BB+C

BfB+C

AB+C

AfB+C

AfC+B

GC+B

GfC+B

FC+B

EC+B

EfC+B

DC+B

DfC+B

CC+B

BC+B

BfC+B

AC+B

ACs+Bf

AfCs+Bf

GCs+Bf

GfCs+Bf

FCs+Bf

ECs+Bf

EfCs+Bf

DCs+Bf

DfCs+Bf

CCs+Bf

BCs+Bf

BfCs+Bf

BfD+A

AD+A

AfD+A

GD+A

GfD+A

FD+A

ED+A

EfD+A

DD+A

DfD+A

CD+A

BD+A

BDs+Af

voice leading α→β

CE+G

BfDs+Af

ADs+Af

AfDs+Af

GDs+Af

GfDs+Af

FDs+Af

EDs+Af

EfDs+Af

DDs+Af

DfDs+Af

CDs+Af

Figure S19. A. The voice leadings
and
define a plane in three-note
chord space (B, shown also in C). Chords on this plane are said to be “axially
isographic.” (continued on next page)

43

C

Figure S19 (continued). C. The chords in B define a plane in three-note OP
space (T3/S3). Since the plane reflects of the space s mirror boundaries, it
appears to have kinks.

44

Table S1, page 1.

chord progression type,
transpositional chordprogression class
Schritt, Wechsel
(Oettingen, Riemann)
progression of set classes

chord progression

path in pitch-class space

pitch-class interval class

pitch-class interval (I)
pitch-class interval (II)

pitch class
chord of pitches, pitch set
chord, set
transpositional set class
TI set class

Term

Definition
Example
Single objects
O
An octave-free note-type
G3, G4, G5
P
An unordered collection of pitches
(C4, E4, G4), (E4, C4, G4)
OPC
An unordered set of pitch classes
(C4, E4, G4), (E4, G4, G5, C3)
OPTC
A class of T-related chords
(C4, E4, G4), (Fs3, D2, A5, D6)
OPTIC
A class of T or I related chords
(C4, Ef4, G4), (Fs3, D2, A5, D6)
Progressions I: Intervals (one-note progressions)
individual O
An ordered pair of pitch classes
C4 E4, C2 E2, C4 E5
individual O,
Pitch class intervals (I) related by T
C4 E4, D4 Fs2
uniform T
(e.g. “ascending major third”)
individual O,
Pitch class intervals (I) related by T or I
C4 E4, Fs2 D5
uniform TI
uniform OT
A specific path between pitch classes (e.g.
C4 B3, C5 B4, G4 Fs4 but not
“eleven ascending semitones”)
C4 B4
Progressions II: Chord progressions (individual OPC)
individual OPC
A succession of pitch class sets
(C4, E4, G4) (C4, F4, A4)
(e.g. “C major moving to F major”)
(C2, E3, C4, G4) (F2, A3, C5)
individual OPC,
Chord progressions related uniformly by
(C4, E4, G4) (C4, F4, A4)
uniform T
transposition.
(D2, Fs3, D4, A4) (G2, B3, D5)
(e.g. “major chords descending by fifth”)
individual OPC,
Chord progressions related uniformly by TI
(C4, Ef4, G4) (Bf4, D4, G4)
uniform TI
(e.g. Riemann’s “Gegenquintschritt”)
(D2, Fs3, D4, A4) (G2, B3, D5)
individual OPTIC
A succession of set classes
(D2, Fs3, D4, A4) (F2, A3, C5)
(e.g. “an 013 followed by an 015”)
(C4, Ef4, G4) (B4, Ds4, Gs4))

Symmetry

Table S1, page 2.

inversional voice leading
(Straus)

transpositional voice
leading
(Straus)

OPTI voice-leading class

voice leading between
pitch sets
path-neutral voice leading
between pitch- class sets
(Lewin, Straus)
path-specific voice leading
between pitch-class sets
(Tymoczko)
OPT voice-leading class

(C4, E4, G4)
(E4, G4, C4)
(C4, E4, G4)
(E5, C2, G3)

A bijective function from the pitch
(C4, E4, G4)
classes in one set to paths in pitch(G2, E4, C5)
class space.
uniform OP,
Path-specific voice leadings related
(C4, E4, G4)
individual T
individually by transposition
(E4, C5, G5)
uniform OPI,
Path-specific voice leadings related
(C4, E4, G4)
individual T
by individual transposition or
(C4, Ef4, G4)
uniform inversion
Progressions IV: General categories of voice leading
any path-neutral
A voice leading that moves every
(C4, E4, G4)
voice leading
pitch class by the same pitch-class
related to the
interval (I) (see above).
identity by
individual T
any path-neutral
A voice leading that moves each
(C4, E4, G4)
voice leading
pitch class to its inversion around
related to the
some fixed point in pitch-class space.
identity by
uniform I

uniform OP

Progressions III: Voice Leadings (uniform P)
uniform P
A bijective function between two
(unordered) chords of pitches
individual O,
A bijective function between two
uniform P
chords of pitch classes

(E4, C4, A3)

(Ef2, G4, Bf5)

(C4, F4, A4)
(E4, B4, Gs5)
(C4, F4, A4)
(B3, Ds4, Gs4)

(C4, F4, A4)
(A2, F4, C5)

(C4, F4, A4)
(F4, A4, C4)
(C4, F4, A4)
(F2, C6, A4)

Symmetry
O

Space
Tn

P
T
I
OP

Rn/Sn
Rn-1
Rn/Z2
Tn/Sn

OT

Tn-1

OI

Tn/Z2

PT

Rn-1/Sn

PI

Rn/(Sn Z2)

TI

Rn-1/Z2

OPT

Tn-1/Sn

OPI

Tn/(Sn Z2)

OTI

Tn-1/Z2

PTI

Rn-1/(Sn Z2)

OPTI

Tn-1/(Sn Z2)

Fundamental Domain
max(x1, x2, …, xn) min(x1, x2, …, xn) + 12
0
xi 12
x1 x2 … xn
xi = 0
x2 – x1 xn – xn-1
x1 x2 … xn x1 + 12
0
xi 12
min(x1, x2, …, xn) = x1
max(x1, x2, …, xn) x1 + 12
xi = 0
max(x1, x2, …, xn) min(x1, x2, …, xn) + 12
0
xi 12
x2 – x1 xn – xn-1
x1 x2 … xn
xi = 0
x1 x2 … xn
x2 – x1 xn – xn-1
xi = 0
x2 – x1 xn – xn-1
xn x1 + 12
xi = 0
x1 + 12 – xn xi+1 – xi, 1 i < n
x1 x2 … xn x1 + 12
0
xi 12
x2 – x1 xn – xn-1
min(x1, x2, …, xn) = x1
max(x1, x2, …, xn) x1 + 12
xi = 0
x2 – x1 xn – xn-1
x1 x2 … xn
xi = 0
x2 – x1 xn – xn-1
xn x1 + 12
xi = 0
x1 + 12 – xn xi+1 – xi, 1 i < n – 1
x2 – x1 xn – xn-1

Table S2. Fundamental domains for the OPTI quotient spaces.

47

Theorist

Name of structure

Description

Werckmeister (1698) (S59)

LR chain

Graph in 3-note OP space

Heinichen (1728) (S59)

Circle of fifths

Graph in 7-note OP space

Vial (1767) (S59)

Chart of the regions

Graph in 7-note OP space

Hauptmann (1853) (S60)

Diatonic circle of thirds

Graph in 3-note OP space

Euler (1739), Oettingen (1866),

The Tonnetz

The geometrical dual of

Riemann (1873)(S61)

graphs in R3 and 3-note OP space

Roiter (1983) (S62)

OT spaces

Roeder (1984) (S57)

Ordered interval space

Graphs in OT space; fundamental
domains for OPT and OPTI spaces
using an unusual projection.

Lewin (1990) (S46)

K-nets

Klumpenhouwer (1991) (S45)
Cohn (1996) (S63)
Douthett/Steinbach (1998) (S58)

Lines in OP, OPT,
and OPTI space

Hexatonic Cycle

Graph in 3-note OP space

Cube dance, Power towers

Graphs in 3- and 4-note OP space

Morris (1998) (S64)

Graphs in OP and OPT spaces

Erlich (2000) (S62)

Three-note OTI space

Stoecker (2002) (S54)

axial isography

Planes in three-note OPT space

Callender (2002) (S22)

3-note T, PT, PTI, and OPTI space

(published 2004)

(complete)

Straus (2003) (S37)

Graphs in 3- and 4-note OPTI space

Cohn (2003) (S23)

4-note OPT and OPTI space
(incomplete)

Quinn (2003) (S62)
Tymoczko (2004) (S65)

4-note OPT and OPTI space (complete)
Scale lattice

Graph in 7-note OP space,
also found in other dimensions

Tymoczko (2006) (S2)

All OP spaces

Table S3. Previous implicitly or explicitly geometrical models of musical
structure. All can be interpreted as depicting portions of the quotient spaces
described in this paper.

48

REFERENCES AND NOTES
S1. This equivalence class consists of all three-voice progressions that either move the
root, third, and fifth of major triad by x, x + 1, and x + 2 semitones, respectively, or the
root, third, and fifth of a minor triad by x – 2, x – 1, and x semitones, respectively, where
x is any real number.
S2. D. Tymoczko, Science 313, 72 (2006).
S3. This definition of “chord type” is a technical term of art that corresponds reasonably
well with ordinary usage. In some circumstances, however, musicians use “chord type”
to refer to other equivalence classes—such as PT equivalence classes.
S4. J. P. Rameau, Treatise on Harmony (Dover, New York, 1971).
S5. See H. Klumpenhouwer, Music Theory Online 0.9 (1994).
S6. D. Lewin, Generalized Musical Intervals and Transformations (Yale, New Haven,
1987).
S7. G. Mazzola, The Topos of Music (Birkhäuser, Boston, 2002).
S8. If one were to follow Allen Forte in identifying homometric or Z-related points,
such as (C, Cs, E, Fs)OPTI and (C, Cs, Ds, G)OPTI in four-note OPTI space (T3/[S4 Z2]),
there would not be a well-defined coordinate system at the point of identification. Thus,
quotient spaces formed using this equivalence relation will be significantly less
straightforward than those considered in this paper: in particular, distance cannot be
interpreted as representing voice leading. For more on these spaces, see reference 9.
S9. I. Quinn, Perspectives of New Music 44.2, 114 (2006).
S10. Perceptual models of voice-leading distance need to be quite complex, as there are
subtle interactions between displacement size and the number of moving voices, the
direction of motion, and so on. See reference 11.
S11. C. Callender, and N. Rogers, Proceedings of the International Conference of Music
Perception and Cognition 9, 1686 (2006).
S12. A. Bregman, Auditory Scene Analysis (Cambridge, MIT Press, 1990).
S13. D. Huron, Music Perception 19, 1 (2001).
S14. C. Masson, Nouveau Traité des Règles pour la Composition de la Musique (Da
Capo, New York, 1967).
S15. O. Hostinsk´ , Die Lehre von den musikalischen Klängen (H. Dominicus, Prague,
y
1879).
S16. A. Schoenberg, Theory of Harmony (University of California, Los Angeles, 1983).
S17. Note that the distribution constraint is a weakened version of the triangle inequality:
it asserts that all voice leadings such as B in Figure S6C, which form two legs of a
triangle by “bouncing off” a singularity, must be at least as large as the voice leading
forming the third leg of the triangle (e.g. A in the same figure). However, not all

49

triangles can be translated so that they are of this form. Consequently, the distribution
constraint is consistent with, but does not imply, the triangle inequality.
S18. The C operation is an isometry of the L norm. Hence, if one is willing to use this
metric, then distance in C spaces can be taken to represent voice-leading size.
S19. The claim that A B is significantly larger than C4 G4 depends on the stipulation
that the motion from A to B consists of a number of conceptually distinct voices. In many
cases (for instance, a string section playing in unison), such slight variations in pitch
would not be conceived (or perceived) as distinct, and should instead be represented as a
single, fused voice moving from C4 to G4.
S20. A. Hatcher, Algebraic Topology (Cambridge, New York, 2002).
S21. W. Thurston, The Geometry and Topology of Three Manifolds, available at
http://www.msri.org/publications/books/gt3m/.
S22. C. Callender, Music Theory Online 10.3 (2004).
S23. R. Cohn, Music Theory Online 9.4 (2003).
S24. http://music.princeton.edu/~dmitri/ChordGeometries.html
S25. R. Hall and D. Tymoczko, paper presented to the tenth annual Bridges Conference,
Donostia, Spain, July 24-27, 2007.
S26. R. Morris, Perspectives of New Music 18, 445 (1979-80).
S27. C. Lord, Journal of Music Theory 25, 91 (1981).
S28. E. Isaacson, Journal of Music Theory 34, 1 (1990).
S29. D. Scott, and E. Isaacson, Perspectives of New Music 36.2, 107 (1998).
S30. J. Rahn, Perspectives of New Music 18, 483 (1979-80).
S31. D. Lewin, Perspectives of New Music 18, 498 (1979-80).
S32. M. Castrén, thesis, Sibelius Academy (1994).
S33. M. Buchler, Journal of Music Theory 45, 263 (2000).
S34. T. Demske, Music Theory Online 1.2, (1995).
S35. I. Quinn, Perspectives of New Music 39, 108 (2001).
S36. J. Roeder, Perspectives of New Music 25, 362 (1987).
S37. J. Straus, Music Theory Spectrum 25, 305 (2003).
S38. A. Tversky, Psychological Review 84, 327 (1977).
S39. R. Morris, Music Theory Spectrum, 15, 205 (1993).
S40. E. Marvin, thesis, Eastman School (1988).
S41. I. Shmulevich, Journal of New Music Research 33.1, 17 (2004).
S42. W. Cook and L. Seiford, American Statistician 37.4, 307 (1983).
S43. I. Quinn, Music Theory Spectrum, 19.2, 232 (1997).
S44. Quinn’s original proposal represents a continuous variant of Marvin’s “half-space
counting” approach, such that the half-spaces are given more or less weight depending on
how deeply the vector points into them.
50

S45. H. Klumpenhouwer, thesis, Harvard University (1991).
S46. D. Lewin, Music Theory Spectrum 12, 83 (1990).
S47. D. Lewin, Journal of Music Theory 38, 79 (1994).
S48. Any two pitch classes are related by some transposition and some inversion; the Knet description, by partitioning the chord, asserts that for a particular pair of pitch classes
either the transposition or the inversion is more significant musically.
S49. Two notes move by “exact contrary motion” if they move by the same distance in
opposite directions. In the voice leadings under discussion, any pair of notes in opposite
partitions move by exact contrary motion.
S50. This notation for hyper-transpositions and inversions is nonstandard. Traditional
theorists use <T2x> to describe the relation between K-net lines related by Tx, and <I2x>
to describe the relation between K-net lines related by Ix. Thus, according to traditional
terminology, <T2> relates the K-net {C, E} + {G} to {Df, F} + {Af}, even though the
chords themselves (as well as their K-net lines) relate by single-semitone transposition.
See reference 51.
S51. D. Tymoczko, Music Theory Online 13.3 (2007).
S52. This voice leading consequently skips the equal-tempered set-class in which the
singleton is three semitones below the lowest note of the minor third.
S53. Of course, voice leadings are defined only up to uniform permutations of their
voices. Thus the voice leading could also be expressed in pitch space such that the inner
two voices moved while the outer voices remained stationary.
S54. P. Stoecker, Music Theory Spectrum 24, 231 (2002).
S55. J. Ianni and L. Shuster, paper presented to the Mathematics and Computation in
Music Conference, Berlin, May 18-20, 2007.
S56. M. Buchler, Music Theory Online 13.2 (2007).
S57. J. Roeder, thesis, Yale University (1984).
S58. J. Douthett, P. Steinbach, Journal of Music Theory 42, 241 (1998).
S59. See J. Lester, Compositional Theory in the Eighteenth Century (Cambridge:
Harvard, 1992).
S60. M. Hauptmann, Die Natur der Harmonik und der Metrik (Leipzig: Breitkopf, 1853).
S61. M. K. Mooney, thesis, Columbia University (1996).
S62. Unpublished.
S63. R. Cohn, Music Analysis 15, 9 (1996).
S64. R. Morris, Music Theory Spectrum 20, 175 (1998).
S65. D. Tymoczko, Journal of Music Theory 48.2, 215 (2004).

51

