An Expert System for Harmonizing Four-Part Chorales
Author(s): Kemal Ebcioğlu
Source: Computer Music Journal, Vol. 12, No. 3 (Autumn, 1988), pp. 43-51
Published by: The MIT Press
Stable URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/3680335
Accessed: 19/06/2010 16:58
Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of JSTOR's Terms and Conditions of Use, available at
http://www.jstor.org/page/info/about/policies/terms.jsp. JSTOR's Terms and Conditions of Use provides, in part, that unless
you have obtained prior permission, you may not download an entire issue of a journal or multiple copies of articles, and you
may use content in the JSTOR archive only for your personal, non-commercial use.
Please contact the publisher regarding any further use of this work. Publisher contact information may be obtained at
http://www.jstor.org/action/showPublisher?publisherCode=mitpress.
Each copy of any part of a JSTOR transmission must contain the same copyright notice that appears on the screen or printed
page of such transmission.
JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide range of
content in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and facilitate new forms
of scholarship. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.

The MIT Press is collaborating with JSTOR to digitize, preserve and extend access to Computer Music
Journal.

http://www.jstor.org

Kemal
Ebciotlu
IBM, Thomas J. Watson Research Center
P.O. Box 704
Yorktown Heights, New York 10598 USA

Expert
System for
Harmonizing
Four-part

An

Chorales

Introduction
In this paper, we report on a rule-based expert system called CHORAL, for harmonization and Schenkerian analysis of chorales in the style of J.S. Bach.
We first briefly compare our approach with some
current trends in algorithmic composition and music analysis, and we then describe the CHORAL
system itself.

Overview Current
of
to
Approaches Algorithmic
Music
Quite a few trends in algorithmic composition today are based on a streamlined formalism, for example, in the form of random generation of note
attributes using elegant statistical distributions
(Xenakis 1971), terse and powerful formal grammars (Jones 1981), elegant mathematical models
(Kendall 1981; Vaggione 1984), or generalizations of
serial composition procedures (Laske 1981). The
economy and elegance of the formal representation
underlying these musical styles (which are not in
the least less respectable than traditional styles of
music), may often have an aesthetic appeal in and
of themselves. On the other hand, traditional music
and most of modern music, which are usually composed without a computer, do not seem to permit
such economical representations. In the traditional
style, the typical basic training the composer has to
go through in harmony, strict counterpoint, fugue,
This researchwas supportedby NSF grantDCR-8316665, and a
majorportion of it was done at the Department of Computer
Science, S.U.N.Y.at Buffalo,under the direction of my advisor,
the late Prof.JohnMyhill. A preliminaryversion of this paper
appearedin the Proceedings of the 1986 International Computer
Music Conference(SanFrancisco:ComputerMusic Association).
Computer Music Journal,Vol. 12, No. 3, Fall 1988,
? 1988 Massachusetts Institute of Technology.

and orchestration already imposes a certain minimal complexity on the amount of knowledge required to describe such a style.
Also, many will agree that a similar complexity
can be observed in the works of modern "noncomputer" composers like Karlheinz Stockhausen,
Pierre Boulez, Gyorgi Ligeti, Jan Rychlik, and Steve
Reich (his later compositions). It seems that musical composition is a hard mental task that requires
a substantial amount of knowledge, and any serious
attempt to simulate "noncomputer" music composition on the computer would have to face the
task of constructing a formal model of considerable complexity. We have found that even the algorithmic representation of the knowledge underlying the seemingly simple Bach chorale style is a
task that already borders the intractable.
As for the music analysis field, the prevailing
trends seem to emphasize selective and unobvious
properties of music; for example, a golden section
in some motets of Dufay (Sandresky 1981), or a
surprising log-normal distribution in the dissonances within some chorales of Bach (Knopoff and
Hutchinson 1981). Even the analysis approaches
that capture a profound structure in tonal music,
such as reduction techniques (Schenker 1979;
Lerdahl and Jackendoff 1983), are still based on
finding a selective property (the property that the
piece has a plausible parsing). These properties,
although interesting in their own right, do not
constitute a satisfactory explanation of the music
in question, in the sense that there exist many
"pieces" that have these properties, but that have
no relationship with the style.
An alternative approach that would perhaps provide a more satisfactory understanding of the music, is to attempt to algorithmically generate pieces
in the same approximate style. There have already
been some attempts at this analysis by synthesis
approach to music in some simpler traditional
styles, such as folk melodies (Zaripov 1960), or the

Ebcioglu

43

first two phrases of Bach chorale melodies (Baroni
and Jacoboni 1976). But there are two problems associated with extending this approach to more sub-

stantial traditional styles. First, it may be difficult
to prevent the designer of such a resynthesis algorithm from introducing traits that would distort
the style in an unscholarly fashion (this unscholarliness may be trivially removed by resynthesizing
only the original pieces of the composer in some
interesting way-but we feel that the approach of
synthesizing new pieces is also worthwhile). The
second, and more fundamental problem is that, although there has been good progress in the automated synthesis of sound (Mathews et al. 1969;
Roads and Strawn 1985), the automated composition of nontrivial tonal music is to date not sufficiently understood (and is still regarded with some
suspicion in the traditional circles). The present research is an attempt to further our understanding of
the mechanical generation of music, by extending
the analysis by synthesis approach to a more complex style, the style of the Bach chorale harmonizations. To cope with the complexity of the problem,
we have developed a rule-based approach inspired
from recent research in artificial intelligence, as
well as from a heuristic search method that we had
used in an earlier, smaller-scale strict counterpoint
program (Ebcioglu 1979, 1980).

An
BSL: EfficientLogicProgramming
Language
Perhapsbecause of its inherent difficulty, the generation of nontrivial tonal music appearsto require
large computational resources. In typical computing environments, artificial intelligence (AI) languages such as Prolog or Lisp tend to be too slow
for implementing our particular approach to the
algorithmic generation of music. More efficient
languages such as C or Fortran are not viable alternatives, since they in turn tend to be too low-level
for the task of coding a large music expert system.
At the outset of our research, we decided to represent musical knowledge using first-order predicate
calculus; and in order to cope with the large computational requirements of tonal music generation,
we have designed BSL (Backtracking Specification
Language) (Ebcioglu 1986, 1987a, 1987b, 1988), a
44

new and efficient logic programming language that
is fundamentally different from Prolog. From the
execution viewpoint, BSL is a nondeterministic
Algol-class language where variables cannot be assigned more than once except in controlled contexts. However, BSL has a desirable relationship
with first-order predicate calculus that makes it a
new kind of logic programming language: namely,
each BSL program corresponds to an assertion in
first-order logic, and executing the BSL program
amounts to proving the corresponding assertion.
More precisely, the semantics of a BSL program F is
defined via a ternary relation I, such that ((F, or,7)
means program F leads to final state 7 when started
in initial state or, where a state is a mapping from
variable names to elements of a "computer" universe, consisting of integers, arrays, records, and so
on. There is a simple mapping Xu[u'] that translates a BSL program to a formula of a first-order language, such that if a BSL program F terminates in
some state o-, then the corresponding first order formula F' is true in or (where the truth of a formula in
a given state o- is evaluated in a fixed "computer"
interpretation involving integers, arrays, records,
and operations on these, after replacing any free
variables x in the formula by o-(x)). Thus, successfully executing a BSL program without free variables amounts to constructively proving that the
corresponding first-order sentence is true in the
fixed "computer" interpretation, or in all models of
a suitably axiomatized theory of integers, arrays,
and records.
A formal and rigorous description of BSL, in a
style inspired from (de Bakker 1979), can be found
in (Ebcioglu 1987a). To implement BSL on real computers, we wrote a compiler, in Lisp, that translates
BSL programs into efficient backtracking programs
in C. Except for a few C routines for reading in the
melody and for graphics, the CHORAL expert system has been coded entirely in BSL.

A KnowledgeRepresentationTechniquefor

Music
An ambitious music expert system somehow has
to deal with the problem of representing a large
amount of complex musical knowledge. Even when
one has avoided the approach of coding the rules
Computer Music Journal

directly in a conventional language, and one has
chosen to represent musical knowledge declaratively, in logic, the complexity of the knowledge
base may still be far from being conquered. To represent substantial amounts of musical knowledge

in first-orderlogic, it appearsnecessary to divide up
the logical assertions into groups that observe the
music from multiple viewpoints. Using a small and
nonredundant set of primitive functions and predicates to represent music, although mathematically
appealing, does not seem to be suitable for expressing all the required viewpoints of the music in a
natural way. For example, a set of primitive functions {p,a,d}, that observe each voice as a linear sequence of notes, such that p(0,v), p(1,v), . . . , a(0,v),
a(1,v), . .., d(0,v), d(1,v),... are the pitches, accidentals and durations of the notes of voice v, would
certainly be sufficient to describe a simple vocal
piece, and would also be suitable for expressing
horizontal, melodic relationships in each voice; but
the same primitives would be somewhat clumsy for
expressing vertical, harmonic relationships between voices, since the ith note of one voice obviously does not in general line up with the ith
note of another voice. Similarly, a large-scale work
may require several hierarchical viewpoints that
may constitute successively refined plans of the
piece. So we opted for a knowledge representation
that used multiple sets of logical primitives to represent the different viewpoints of the music. Each
set of primitives was deliberately made richer than
required, by incorporating all the musical attributes
that we felt we could need while writing rules.
The viewpoints used by our CHORAL system include one that observes the chord skeleton of the
chorale, one that observes the individual melodic
lines of the different voices, and another one that
observes the Schenkerian voice leading within the
descant and bass. The need for using multiple viewpoints of the "solution object" has arisen in expert
systems in other domains as well: For example, the
Hearsay-II speech understanding system (Erman
et al. 1980) observed the input utterance as mutually consistent streams of syllables, words, and
word sequences, and the constraints system of
(Sussman and Steele 1980) used equivalent circuits
for observing a given fragment of an electrical circuit from more than one viewpoint.

Implementing Multiple Points of View
We now describe one possible way of implementing
multiple viewpoints of the music in BSL. In this
method, which was used in the CHORAL system,
each viewpoint is represented by a different data
structure, typically an array of records (called the
solution array of that viewpoint), which serves as a
rich set of primitive pseudofunctions and predicates
for that view. This multiple view paradigm has the
following procedural aspect: It is convenient to visualize a separate process for each viewpoint, which
incrementally constructs (assigns to) its solution array, in close interaction with other processes constructing their respective solution arrays. Each
process executes a series of generate-and-test steps.
At the nth generate-and-test step of a process, n =
0, 1, ..., a value is selected and assigned to the
n th element of the solution array of the viewpoint,
n - 1 of the
depending on the elements 0,...,
same solution array, the currently assigned elements of the solution arrays of other viewpoints,
and the program input. The processes behave somewhat like the multiple processes that are scheduled
on a single hardware processor in a timesharing
operating system. They are arranged in a roundrobin scheduling chain. Each process (implemented
as a BSL predicate), whenever it becomes active (is
given the CPU), first attempts to execute zero or
more generate-and-test steps until all of its inputs
are exhausted, and then gets blocked, relinquishing
the CPU to the next process in the chain. Among
the processes, there is a specially designated clock
process, which executes exactly one step when it is
scheduled; all other processes depend on inputs
produced by this process, and thus become blocked
whenever they need an input that has not yet been
produced by the clock process. Thus, each step of
the clock process determines the total amount of
work done in one complete trip around the roundrobin scheduling chain. The process scheduling
paradigm described here is backtrackable, as explained later.
Knowledge Base of the Viewpoints
The knowledge base of each viewpoint is expressed
in three groups of logic assertions (BSL subformuEbcioglu

45

las), which determine the way in which the nth
generate-and-test step is executed. (1) Production
rules: These are the formal analogs of the production rules that would be found in a production system for a generate-and-test application, such as
Stefik's GA1 system, which solves a search problem in molecular genetics (Stefik 1978). The informal meaning of a production rule is "IF certain
conditions are true about the partial solution (elements 0, . . . , n - 1, and the already assigned attributes of element n) and external data structures,
THEN a certain value can be added to the partial
solution (assigned to a group of attributes of element n)." Their procedural effect is to generate the
possible assignments to element n of the solution
array. (2) Constraints: These side-effect-free subformulas assert absolute rules about elements 0,...,
n of the solution array, and external data structures.
They have the procedural effect of rejecting certain
assignments to element n of the solution array (this
effect is also called early pruning in AI literature
[Hayes-Roth, Waterman, and Lenat 1983], since it
removes certain paths from the search tree that are
guaranteed not to lead to any solution). (3) Heuristics: These side-effect-free subformulas assert desirable properties of the solution elements 0, . . . , n
and external data structures. They have the procedural effect of having certain assignments to element n of the solution array tried before others are.
The purpose of the heuristics is to guide the search
so that the solution first found is a good solution.
Here is how the nth generate-and-test step of a process is executed: First, all possible assignments to
the n th element of the solution array are generated
via the production rules. If a candidate assignment

does not comply with the constraints, it is thrown
away, otherwise its worth is computed by summing

the weights of the heuristics that it makes true (the
heuristics are weighted by different powers of two,
with the most important heuristic having the greatest weight, etc.). Assuming that at least one choice
was found for the nth element, the generate-andtest step is then completed by assigning the best
choice to the nth element of the solution array
(with ties being resolved randomly). But at the same
time, the current state of all the processes, and the
list of remaining choices for this generate-and-test

46

step, are pushed down; so that the current state of
all the processes can later be recovered and the execution of the current process can be restarted, by
choosing the next best alternative for this generateand-test step. Later on, if an impasse is encountered, that is, some process fails to find any acceptable values for an element of its solution array,
control returns to the most recent step among the
history of the steps of all the processes, which is
estimated to be responsible for the failure. This is
not necessarily the immediately preceding step,
which could be irrelevant to the failure; BSL uses
an intelligent backtracking algorithm. Execution
then continues with the next best choice at the
step where the return has been made to (assuming
that there is a remaining choice at this step. If there
is none, further backtracking occurs).
The generate-and-test method described here
is based on the idea of producing the solution incrementally, and backing up where necessary. An
alternative search technique in the field of algorithmic music is to repetitively generate (with a nonbacktracking algorithm) a new random solution and
test it, until an acceptable solution is found (e.g.,
Baroni and Jacoboni 1976); but this latter technique
is difficult to use when the acceptable solutions are
extremely few in comparison to the generable solutions, which we feel is a common situation in
complex styles of music. Generate-and-test is a basic search technique used in expert system design
(Hayes-Roth, Waterman, and Lenat 1983). Studies
on other relevant search techniques of artificial intelligence can be found (e.g., Nilsson 1971; Pearl
1983). This style of incorporating heuristics in a
generate-and-test method for producing music, was
used in our earlier strict counterpoint program (Ebcioglu 1979, 1980) and was also independently used
by B. Schottstaedt in another, larger-scale strict
counterpoint program (Schottstaedt 1984). (Ames
1983) used a similar technique for generating music
in a more contemporary contrapuntal style.
In certain cases a viewpoint may be completely

dependent on another, that is, it may not introduce
new choices on its own. In the case of such redun-

dant views, it is possible to maintain several views
(solution arrays) in a single process, provided that
one master view is chosen to execute the process

Computer Music Journal

step and comply with the paradigm.This can be
done as follows: As soon as a possible assignment
to the nth element of the solution arrayof the master viewpoint is generated via the production rules
of the master viewpoint, the subordinate views are
tentatively updated according to this new element
of the master viewpoint. The subordinate views
can advance by zero, one, or more than one steps,
even though the master view advances by one step.
Then the constraints and heuristics of the subordinate views are used in conjunction with the constraints and heuristics of the master view in order
to determine the acceptability of the current tentative assignment to the nth element of the master
view, and to compute how desirable this assignment is. Note that the subordinate views do not
have production rules, since the new addition to the
master view completely determines all attributes of
the new element(s) of the subordinate views.
In the generate-and-testtechnique described here,
the heuristics constitute the most crucial ingredient for obtaining musical results. It is known that
absolute rules, such as those found in a treatise, are
not sufficient for producing beautiful music. Composers use much additional knowledge (roughly
termed as "talent")for choosing among the "correct" extensions of a partial composition at each
stage of the compositional process. While our limited powers of introspection prevent us from replicating the thought process of such choices in an
algorithm, we conjecture that a good algorithmic
approximation can be obtained by using a large
number of prioritized heuristics, or recommendations, based on style-specific musical knowledge.
The heuristics used in our music generation algorithm help to prevent the search process from
taking "correct"but unmusical paths (these paths
could easily be followed if absolute rules and random search were used alone), and they guide the
music in the preferreddirection.

TheViewpoints the CHORAL
of
System
We are now in a position to discuss the knowledge
models, or viewpoints of the CHORALsystem. The
CHORALsystem knowledge base, which was de-

veloped over a period of several years, is based on
our study of the Bach chorales (Terry 1964), our
personal intuitions, and traditional theoretical
treatises such as (Louis and Thuille 1906; Koechlin
1928). We will give here only a brief overview of the
knowledge base of CHORAL, which is in reality
very long and complex. The CHORAL system uses
the backtrackable process scheduling technique described above to implement the following viewpoints of the chorale.
The chord skeleton view observes the chorale as
a sequence of rhythmless chords and fermatas, with
some unconventional symbols underneath them,
indicating key and degree within key. This is the
clock process, and produces one chord per step. The
primitives of this view allow referencing attributes
such as the pitch and accidental of a voice v of any
chord n in the sequence of skeletal chords. Although some harmony treatises tend to omit rules
about degree transitions (e.g., Dubois 1921), keeping track of the key and degree within key, and imposing careful rules for the transitions between the
different degrees, were found to be necessary for
maintaining a solid sense of tonality early during
our research. Without key and degree information,
progressions tend to sound "Gregorian." Similarly,
implementing modulations turned out to be no
simple matter, and a literal implementation of the
definition of modulation as in a treatise was found
to be too permissive, yielding unacceptable results.
Instead, we have implemented a complex set of production rules for generating a set of style-specific
modulating progressions, constraints for filtering
out the unacceptable modulating progressions, and
heuristics for choosing the desirable modulating
progressions. In the chord skeleton view we place,
for example, the production rules that enumerate
the possible ways of modulating to a new key, constraints about the preparation and resolution of a
seventh in a seventh chord, and heuristics that prefer "Bachian" cadences.
The fill-in view observes the chorale as four
interacting automata that change states in lockstep, generating the actual notes of the chorale in
the form of suspensions, passing tones, and similar ornamentations, depending on the underlying
chord skeleton. For each voice v at fill-in step n,

Ebciog~lu

47

the primitives allow referencing attributes of voice
v at a weak eighth beat and an immediately following strong eighth beat, and the new state that voice
v enters at fill-in step n (states are suspension, descending passing tone, and normal). At each of its
steps, the fill-in view generates the cross product
of all possible inessential notes (passing tones,
neighbor notes, suspensions, other chorale-specific
ornamentations) in all the voices, discards the unacceptable combinations of inessential notes, and
selects the desirable combinations, via a complex
set of production rules, constraints, and heuristics.
We felt that bold clashes of simultaneous inessential notes were indispensable for achieving the
effect of a "Bachian" harmonic-melodic flow. The
harmonization task would have been greatly simplified if we had avoided simultaneous inessential
notes, but we felt that we then probably would not
obtain music. Note that precise rules about simultaneous inessential notes were not at all readily
available. The typical treatise on school harmony
gives precise rules on severely restricted forms of
simultaneous inessential notes (e.g., Bitsch 1957).
In other traditional studies on passing notes in
Bach, (e.g., Koechlin 1922; McHose 1947) authors
tend to merely give examples of clashes of simultaneous inessential notes from Bach, which the talented music student will nevertheless digest in an
unconscious way, but which are not of suitable precision for programming.
The fill-in view reads the chord skeleton output.
In this view we place, for example, the production
rules for enumerating the long list of possible inessential note patterns that enable the desirable
bold clashes of passing tones, a constraint about
not sounding the resolution of a suspension above
the suspension, and a heuristic on following a suspension by another in the same voice (a Bachian
clich6).
The time-slice view observes the chorale as a sequence of vertical time-slices, each of which has a
duration of an eighth-note, and imposes harmonic
constraints. This view is redundant with and subordinate to fill-in. The primitives of this view allow
referencing attributes such as the pitch and accidental of a voice v at any time-slice i, and whether

a new note of voice v is struck at that time-slice. In
this view we place, for example, a constraint about
consecutive octaves and fifths.
The melodic string view observes the sequence
of individual notes of the different voices from
a purely melodic standpoint. The primitives of
this view allow referencing attributes such as the
pitch and accidental of any note i of a voice v.
The merged melodic string view is similar to the
melodic string view, except that the repeated adjacent pitches are merged into a single note. The
merged melodic string view was necessary for recognizing and advising against bad melodic patterns
which are not alleviated even when there are repeating notes in the pattern. These views are also
redundant with, and subordinate to fill-in. In these
views we place, for example, a constraint about
sevenths or ninths spanned in three notes, a heuristic about continuing an ongoing linear progression
in a given voice, and some other highly difficult
constraints for enforcing "melodic interest" in the
inner voices. (The melodic interest constraint of
the merged melodic string view indicates that in
any voice, when a note has occurred as a high corner [is sandwiched between two notes of lower
pitch], then it cannot occur as a high corner for at
least two measures. Notes that occur in high-corner
positions are perceived to be more salient than
notes which are, e.g., in the middle of a linear progression. This rule prevents the monotony arising
from the repetition of the same pitch in the salient
high-corner positions.)
The Schenkerian analysis view is based on our
formal theory of hierarchical voice leading, inspired
from (Schenker 1979) and also from (Lerdahl and
Jackendoff 1983). The core of this theory consists
of a set of rewriting rules which, when repeatedly
applied to a starting pattern, can generate the bass
and descant lines of a chorale. The Schenkerian
analysis view uses our rewriting rules to find separate parse trees for the bass and descant lines of the
chorale, employing a bottom up parsing method,
and using many heuristics for choosing (among the
alternative possible actions at each parser step) the
action that would hopefully lead to the musically
most plausible parsing. Unlike Lerdahl and Jacken-

48

Computer Music Journal

doff's theory, which is based on a hierarchy of individual musical events (e.g., chords, noteheads), our
theory is based on a hierarchy of slurs, and is more
in line with Schenker's theory. The discussion of
our voice-leading theory is beyond the scope of this
paper, and the details can be found in (Ebcioglu
1987a).
The Schenkerian analysis view observes the chorale as the sequence of steps of two nondeterministic bottom-up parsers for the descant and bass. This
view reads the fill-in output. The primitives of this
view allow referencing the output symbols of a
parser step n, the new state that is entered after
executing step n, and the action on the stack at
parser step n. The rules and heuristics of this view
belong to a new paradigm of automated hierarchical music analysis, and do not correspond to any
rules that would be found in a traditional music
theory treatise. In this view we place, for example,
the production rules that enumerate the possible
parser actions that can be done in a given state, a
constraint about the agreement between the fundamental line accidentals and the key of the chorale,
and a heuristic for proper recognition of shallow
occurrences of the Schenkerian D-C-B-C ending
pattern.
The fill-in, time-slice, and melodic string views
are embedded in the same process, with fill-in as
the master view among them.
The order or scheduling of processes is cyclically:
chord skeleton, fill-in, Schenker-bass, Schenker-

descant. Each time chord skeleton is scheduled, it
adds a new chord to the chorale, each time fill-in
is scheduled, it fills in the available chords, and
produces quarterbeats of the actual music until no
more chords are available. Each time a Schenker
process is scheduled, it executes parser steps until
the parser input pointer is less than a lookahead
window away from the end of the currently available notes for the descant or bass. (The lookahead
window gradually grew bigger as our ideas evolved,
and in the recent versions, for the sake of reducing
module sizes, we have found it expedient to place
the Schenker processes in a separate postprocessing
program that reads its input from a file produced by
the other views.) When a process does not have any

available inputs to enable it to execute any steps
when it is scheduled, it simply schedules the next
process in the chain without doing anything. The
chorale melody is given as input to the program.

Results and Conclusions
BSL and the CHORAL system are presently running on the IBM 3081-3090 computers at the IBM
Thomas J.Watson Research Center, under CMS and
Lisp/VM and the AT &T C compiler. The program
takes as input an alphanumeric encoding of the
chorale melody, and outputs the harmonization in
conventional music notation, and the hierarchical
voice-leading analysis in slur-and-notehead notation. The output can be viewed on a graphics
screen or can be printed. The inputs typically take
3-30 min of IBM 3081 CPU time to get harmonized, but some chorales have taken several hours.
Figures 1 and 2 show two output examples, harmonizations of chorales no. 286 and no. 75 (Terry
1964). In these harmonizations, the voices are not
in the proper ranges; but the program writes the
harmonizations in such a way that there exists a
transposition interval that will bring them to the
proper ranges. Note that the parallel fifths between
the soprano and tenor accompanying the anticipation pattern in the soprano at the end of the second
phrase of no. 75, are allowable in the Bach chorale
style (see, e.g., no. 383 [Terry 1964]). Many more
output examples, and the complete list of rules of
the program, can be found in (Ebcioglu 1987a). The
program has presently been tested on over 70 chorale melodies, and has reached an acceptable level
of competence in its harmonization capability; we
can say that its competence approaches that of a
talented student of music who has studied the Bach
chorales. While the heuristically guided generateand-test method described in this paper is not necessarily an accurate cognitive model of the human
compositional process, it seems to work, and it
seems to be capable of producing musical results.
We hope that our techniques will be of use to researchers in algorithmic composition who may be
seeking alternative approaches.

Ebcioglu

49

Fig. 1. Output example of
the harmonization of J. S.
Bach's Chorale no. 286.

Fig. 2. Output example of
the harmonization of J. S.
Bach's Chorale no. 75.

Chorale no. 286

Chorale no. 75

F7i'

:JF

fli

A
J
, .

U
?-L~ r""
r
~'

F

nrI

rL
- F......- Y

,

F F

r.

.

.

~~~jii

U '

I.

ii

?r
Kfli

F
:," 1...

•

i

1 t"

"

i

li

,"

d'

i

.. ....

!

w

Acknowledgments
I am grateful to Prof. Lejaren Hiller for encouraging
me to study computer music. I am also grateful to
the late Prof. John Myhill, for getting me interested
in the mechanization of Schenkerian analysis.

50

Computer Music Journal

References
Ames, C. 1983. "Stylistic Automata in Gradient." Computer Music Journal 7(4):45-56.
Baroni,M., and C. Jacoboni.1976. Versouna Grammatica della Melodia. Universith Studi di Bologna.
Bitsch, M. 1957. Pricis d'Harmonie Tonale. Paris:Alphonse Leduc.
de Bakker,J. 1979. Mathematical Theory of Program
Correctness. Amsterdam: North Holland.
Dubois, T. 1921. Traiti d'Harmonie Thdoriqueet Pratique. Paris: Heugel.
Ebcioglu, K. 1979. "Strict Counterpoint:A Case Study
in Musical Composition by Computers."M. S. thesis
(in English), Department of Computer Engineering.
Ankara:Middle East Technical University.
Ebcioglu, K. 1980. "ComputerCounterpoint."In H.
Howe, ed. Proceedings of the 1980 International Computer Music Conference. San Francisco:Computer Music Association.
Ebcioglu, K. 1986. "An ExpertSystem for Chorale Harmonization." Proceedings of the Association for the
Advancement of Artificial Intelligence. Los Altos:
Morgan-Kaufmann.
Ebcioglu, K. 1987a. "Reporton the CHORALProject:An
Expert System for Chorale Harmonization."Research
reportno. RC 12628, IBM,Thomas J.Watson Research
Center, YorktownHeights, March 1987. This is a revised version of the author'sPh.D. thesis (1986), "An
ExpertSystem for Harmonization of Chorales in the
Style of J.S. Bach,"Technical Reportno. 86-09, Department of Computer Science, S.U.N.Y. at Buffalo.
Ebcioglu, K. 1987b. "An Efficient Logic Programming
Languageand Its Application to Music." Proceedings
of the 4th International Conference on Logic Programming. Cambridge,Mass.: MIT Press.
Ebcioglu, K. 1988. "An ExpertSystem for Chorale Harmonization in the Style of J.S. Bach." Journalof Logic
Programming.To appearin the special issue on Applications of Logic Programmingto Knowledge-based
Systems.
Erman,L. D., et al. 1980. "The Hearsay-IISpeech Understanding System: IntegratingKnowledge to Resolve
Uncertainty." Computing Surveys 12(2):213-253.
Hayes-Roth, F., D. Waterman,and D. Lenat, eds. 1983.
Building Expert Systems. Reading,Mass.: AddisonWesley.
Jones, K. 1981. "Compositional Applications of Stochastic Processes." ComputerMusic Journal5(2):45-61.
Kendall, G. S. 1981. "Composing from a Geometric
Model: Five-leaf Rose." Computer Music Journal
5(4):66-73.

Knopoff,L., and L. Hutchinson. 1981. "InformationTheory for Musical Continua." Journalof Music Theory
25(1).
Koechlin, C. 1922. Atude sur les Notes de Passage. Paris:
Editions Max Eschig.
Koechlin, C. 1928. Traiti de l'Harmonie. Volumes I, II,
III.Paris:]EditionsMax Eschig.
Laske, O. 1981. "Composition Theory in Koenig'sProject
One and ProjectTwo." ComputerMusic Journal
5(4):54-65.
Lerdahl,F., and R. Jackendoff.1983. A Generative Theory
of Tonal Music. Cambridge,Mass.: MIT Press.
Louis, R., and L. Thuille. 1906. Harmonielehre. Stuttgart:
C. Grininger.
Mathews, M. V., et al. 1969. The Technology of Computer Music. Cambridge,Mass.: MIT Press.
McHose, A. I. 1947. The ContrapuntalHarmonic Technique of the 18th Century. Englewood Cliffs: PrenticeHall.
Nilsson, N. J. 1971. Problem Solving Methods in Artificial Intelligence. New York:McGraw-Hill.
Pearl, J., ed. 1983. Artificial Intelligence 21. Special Issue
on Searchand Heuristics.
Roads, C., and J. Strawn, eds. 1985. Foundations of Computer Music. Cambridge,Mass.: MIT Press.
Sandresky,M. V. 1981. "The Golden Section in Three
Byzantine Motets of Dufay." Journalof Music Theory
25(2).
Schenker, H. 1979. Free Composition (Der freie Satz).
Trans. and ed. Ernst Oster. New York:Longman.
Schottstaedt, B. 1984. "Automatic Species Counterpoint." CCRMA, Reportno. STAN-M-19.Stanford:
Department of Music, StanfordUniversity.
DNA Structuresfrom SegStefik, M. 1978. "Inferring
mentation Data." Artificial Intelligence 11:85-114.
Sussman, G. J.,and G. Steele. 1980. "Constraints-A
LanguageFor ExpressingAlmost-HierarchicalDescriptions." Artificial Intelligence 14:1-39.
Terry,C. S., ed. 1964. The Four-voice Chorales of J. S.
Bach. Oxford:OxfordUniversity Press.
Vaggione,H. 1984. "FractalC." Programnotes, International Computer Music Conference, Paris, October 1984.
Xenakis, I. 1974. Formalized Music. Bloomington: Indiana University Press.
Zaripov, R. K. 1960. "On Algorithmic Expressionof Musical Compositions." Doklady, Akademii Nauk, 132(6).

Ebcioglu

51

