Yale University Department of Music

"Shaping Time: Music, the Brain, and Performance", a Response to William Rothstein
Author(s): David Epstein
Source: Journal of Music Theory, Vol. 43, No. 1 (Spring, 1999), pp. 165-190
Published by: Duke University Press on behalf of the Yale University Department of Music
Stable URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/3090693
Accessed: 16/12/2009 13:18
Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of JSTOR's Terms and Conditions of Use, available at
http://www.jstor.org/page/info/about/policies/terms.jsp. JSTOR's Terms and Conditions of Use provides, in part, that unless
you have obtained prior permission, you may not download an entire issue of a journal or multiple copies of articles, and you
may use content in the JSTOR archive only for your personal, non-commercial use.
Please contact the publisher regarding any further use of this work. Publisher contact information may be obtained at
http://www.jstor.org/action/showPublisher?publisherCode=duke.
Each copy of any part of a JSTOR transmission must contain the same copyright notice that appears on the screen or printed
page of such transmission.
JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide range of
content in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and facilitate new forms
of scholarship. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.

Duke University Press and Yale University Department of Music are collaborating with JSTOR to digitize,
preserve and extend access to Journal of Music Theory.

http://www.jstor.org

Shaping Time:Music, The Brain, and Performance,
a response to William Rothstein
RESPONDENT
David Epstein
To the editor:
I write in response to William Rothstein'sreview of my book, Shaping Time:Music, the Brain, and Performance(Journalof Music Theory,
42.1, Spring 1998, 125-44). I would like to cover a numberof points
raised in this review, one of them, by its complex and seemingly contradictorynature,
trulyinvitingdiscussion.It concernswell-knownenigmatic
in the Ninth Symphony of Beethoven. I furtherdiscuss in these
places
pages an interestingissue concernedwith the natureof ideas themselves
that arises from Rothstein's review, though it is not pursued therein.
of
and
Lastly,the review containsmisunderstandings misrepresentations
ideas offered in the book thatneed to be corrected.
major
A numberof Rothstein'scritiquescontributeto ways in which ideas
This is particularly
in Shaping Timewill evolve as I pursuethem further.
trueof some commentswith regardto proportional
tempo, a concernthat
occupies much of ShapingTime,in which Rothsteinseems to findpotential riches despite reservations.I appreciatethis contribution.
The review fails at the outset, however,to fulfill one critical aspect of
a reviewer'sobligation-that of reportage.Reviews are expected to provide readerswith an overview of a book's perspectives,as well as to present a reviewer'sassessmentof its ideas. Thatoverviewis notablyincomplete here. Specifically, the review takes virtually no notice of a major
component of the book-its concern with the neurobiologicalbasis of
musical timing.
Otherthan a quote of mine (Rothstein, 127) that proportional
tempo
seems a way of making music "most in resonance... with the neurophysiology of time processing and communication([Epstein] 155)", and
a commentthat the book "makesextensive use of insights gleaned from
165

the cognitive sciences"(Rothstein,125), readerswouldhaveno idea from
this review thata significantpartShapingTimeis concernedwith the neuthat the perirophysiology of timing and time controlin music. Further,
which characterizesa steady beat in the performanceof music
odicity
seems to rest upon the periodicnatureof neuronalfirings,the oscillatory
functionthatthese neuronsrepresent,the coupled natureof neuraloscillators that results in linkages of periodicitiescovering varying spans of
durations.Yet a significantportion of the book deals with these facts.
6
Chapter is devotedto the biological aspectof neuralperiodicity,its hierarchical and phase relationships,the bases these provide for biological
clocks, the neuralmechanics of these clocks and their coupling oscilla7
techniquesas
toryfunctions.Chapter is devotedto tempo measurement
to deviationsfromexact proportions
and
relateto proportional
tempi,
they
criteriafor judging their significanceor lack of it, to issues of temporal
orderthresholdand consequentaspects of temporalperception.Chapter
9 offers case studiesof music from seven nonwesterncultureswhich sugtempo may be a universal.Should this be so, the
gest that proportional
likelihood that these tempo relationshipsrest upon neural mechanisms
basic to all humanbeings is strengthened.
These chapters, together with their notes and bibliography,occupy
almost 100 pages of Shaping Time,roughly one sixth of the book. Their
ideas furtherpermeatediscussions in laterchapters.They are a majorfocus of the study, and they offer a perspectivethat has begun to work its
way into music theory only in recent years.Yet the review does not discuss them at all. Readersnot familiarwith the book would thus scarcely
be awareof these contents or their scope.
Moving to other matters,let me discuss the points mentioned at the
outset of this letter:
Discussion: 1) Re the Beethoven Ninth Symphony
Rothstein(135) speaks to conundrums
posed by two tempo markings
in the Beethoven Ninth, markingsthat to date, as he rightly notes, have
eluded adequateresolution.I discuss these markingsandtheircontextsin
ShapingTime,but commentfurtherupon them here, for the recentexperience of conducting the work yet again has yielded new perspectives.
My view of the tempo relationsin these places has not changed substantially,but my sense of the contextsthatbearupon themhas enlarged.The
places in question are the Scherzo and Trio of movementII, their tempi
and the stringendothatlinks these sections, and the Alla marcia section
in the last movementand its indicatedtempo.
My sense of things regardingthe second movement rests upon the
questionwhetherBeethoven'smarkingof half=l 16 for the Prestotempo
that constitutes the Trio is valid. The prevalent alternateview is that
166

whole=116 was intended. I continue to feel that half=116 is correct. I
agree with Rothstein (135) about the im Volkstoncharacterof the Trio
tune-a factorthatrequiresthe slower tempo, and furtherfind thatmanuscript studies (outlined in Shaping Time,234-36) confirm this tempo.
As for the rhythmic/thematic
relations that I offer and Rothstein (125)
disputes,there seems room here for legitimatedisagreement.
The salient questionaboutthis passage is the one thatRothstein(137)
asks-namely, "how can one effect a stringendo or ritardandobetween
two tempos if those tempos are effectively identical?"My present-day
responseis thatif we accept Beethoven'sprintedhalf=116 tempo for the
Trio, the passage can therebybe seen as a species of accelerando ... a
tempo, a mode of tempo discourse not unknown in eighteenth-century
music thoughdevelopedmore within the nineteenthcentury,to an extent
by Beethoven himself. That said, this is nonetheless a curiousversion of
accelerando ... a tempo,for almostevery detail of the passage is variant
fromthe standard
notionof thatmodel.A tempo,for example,is not stated
in so many words, and the Presto thatmarksthe Trio seems to contradict
it. Further,
Beethoven calls for stringendo,not accelerando.
Thereareaffinitieswith the prototype,however.Forone, a tempo,thus
the same beat speed as prior to the passage, is explicit in Beethoven's
metronomemarking.(The "Presto"indicationat the alla breve remains
enigmatic and probablycannot be adequatelyexplained. If Beethoven's
metronomedesignationis accepted,thatis, presto is best seen as character designation.If on the otherhandpresto is to determinespeed [thusthe
alternative
charactersuffers.)As for the accelwhole=116], the Volkston
erationaspect of the model, Beethoven's specifiedstringendois a significant variant.
Accelerationcan be seen as physics embracesthe term,i.e.,
scalar acceleration,or change in rate of speed. Stringendo connotes a
more complex event as well as an additionalfactor:the factoris an inner
psychological or affective state, often one of tension; the event that this
creates (or motivates)is a driving,or pressing forward,of tempo. Pressing forwardalso suggests resistance, with the result that the speed ultimately attainedvia stringendo is probablyless great than that achieved
by acceleration. (The French and English terms for this modus operandi-"pressez," or the "press forward"seen above, convey this sense
better than the Italian "stringendo,"
whose connotationof "squeezing"
more a consequence of the action than its cause, thus a beat
suggests
"squeezed"to smaller size.)
This subtle set of circumstancesworks its way in the passage, as does
the sense of forwardmotion establishedby the phrasestructureof these
18 bars (mm. 396-413), wherein the melodic and/ormotivic groupings
continually shortenby a factor of 2, from 4-2-1-1/2 bar sets. (See Epstein, Example 8. f, p. 235, and the discussion, 234-35.) Added to this
mix is the change to alla breve at the close of the passage, which has the
167

effect of further"confusing"the sense of time, of beat, of activity.In essence there are two calculi at work in the passage, one effecting change
via stringendo il tempo, the second creatingchange throughthe altered
meter and its attendant
activitywithin the beat. The resultis describedin
Time-in essence, that "when the Presto theme arriveswe are
Shaping
left momentarily'beatless', unawarefor at least one beat (if not a bar or
more) whatthe tempo,pacing, motionmay be" (234). By the same token,
Beethoven sets the stage at this point for the Trio-for its tempo, and for
the psychological sense of pace. The detailsthatcontrolthatpace-pedal
melodic direction,soft
tone, restrictedthematicrange, "uncomplicated"
dynamics, light articulations,essentially static harmonyprimarilyconsisting of local activity,etc. are discussed on p. 235.
In its entiretythe passage effects a transformation perceptionmore
of
akin perhapsto late nineteenth-century
or that of our own era
practice
thanto 1817-1823-a modulationof pacing, tempo, and details of activity achieved with the subtlety of an "unseen hand."We emerge from
change, thatis, before we are fully awareof what has changed.
The second conundrum,mentionedearlier,concerns what Rothstein
for
(135) describes as "theoddly slow 84 (to the dottedquarter) the alla
marcia variationin the finale."The perceptionis apposite. My view of
this tempo, as discussed in Shaping Time (238-39), has not notably
changed;in the main it still seems unviable.The context within which it
takes place, however,I now view differentlyto the extent that aspects of
the tempo do in fact appearplausible.
Severalfactorsinfluencethis view-for one, the fact that84 to the beat
at the alla Marcia is minimally differentfrom the pulse of 80 that precedes it.' The discrepancyis 5%, the Just Noticeable Difference much
discussedin ShapingTime(thoughignoredin the review).Rothstein(137)
characterizessuch a perception,in a differentcontext, as being in "recHis
ognizably the same pulse-stream." phrasecapturesthis essence.
bears upon the segmentthatprecedesthe
This similar"pulse-stream"
theme within the
alla Marcia. It bears upon the returnof the "Freude"
alla Marcia (m. 543) as well. Essentially,both themes move at the same
articulapace. Both, too, are of loud dynamic, and both share"marked"
tion-the "Cherubsteht vor Gott"explicitly so (the staccatomarks),the
"Freude"
passage implicitly throughthe staccati (spiccati) in the strings
andthe continualnew attacksuponnotes in the winds, brassandtimpani.
Moreovereach of these themesis "setup,"so to speak,in such a way that
the "oddly slow" pace of 84 feels viable. The "vorGott"passage closes
with a fermatamolto tenuto.The cadence thus halts the flow of time. Nor
is that flow set anew as the march begins: its first four bars are mostly
silence, punctuatedsolely by notes on the weak beat of alternatebars.
The ensuing eight measuresincrease the attacksto every bar, but again
168

movement does not occur until 13
on their weak beats. Straightforward
bars into the march.
In a somewhatreverseway the flow of time is retarded-psychologically, if not physically-following the Ft climax (mm. 525-40). The
horn note motive continually begins off the strong beat, obscuring the
prevalentpulse, and the entire passage "relaxes"by way of a long and
diminuendo(ffto pp).
structured
A consequenceof this plan is a tempoof 84 thatseems viable for these
two passages that encase the march.The main body of the march,however (mm. 343-524 or, minimally,431-524), remainsin my view untenlive or recorded,that
able at the tempo of 84. I know of no performance,
manages that tempo, the Norringtonone I discuss (239) included. The
music demandsgreaterdrive than 84 allows.
Seen in this "revisionist"light, the alla Marcia is not so discrepant
from Beethoven's indications. The mystery lies not so much with the
explicit tempomarking(84) as with the absenceof a signal thatthe march
propermust move forward.The large-scale structure,however, clearly
is deliberate,plannedto a degree not generally recognized. Its reigning
tempo (84) appearsnot so oddly slow in this perspective.
Discussion: 2) Of unity, rigidity, and the evolution of ideas
Rothstein(128) raises a complex point concerninga majorpremiseof
Shaping Time.He speaks of "Epstein'srigid adherenceto a Schoenbergian standardof unity" which pertainsto relationships,tempo ones included, thatorganizea work as a unifiedand coherentwhole. "Thisis an
he
assumption,not an argument", says, "andit is neverquestionedin this
book."
But the idea is indeed questioned.Nor is the adherencerigid, as Rothon
stein suggests. (Documentation this is providedhere. See Case IV,last
two items.) Yet Rothstein'spoint bears examination.
I acknowledgethe cogency of unity as a compositionaland an analytical approach, and am aware that postmodern and deconstructionist
perspectives have moved away from this earlier view. These changing
perspectivestouchupona biggerissue, one containedin Rothstein'scomment but not pursuedby him. It concernsthe relevance,and the possible
once vital,
interconnections,
amongevolving ideas-whether perspectives
in an earliertime, retaincogency in a newer age.
highly developed
As we move to new theoretical
bases,for instance,do we simplychange
bases, or do we in factdiscardthe olderbases, muchas we changeclothes?
Alternatively,are there hierarchictheories with levels upon which antithetical ideas coexist, levels wherein they may in fact connect in complementaryways?
169

I suspect the latteris true. Certainlyit is so in the sciences. Newton's
view of space and time, for example, continues to serve adequatelyfor
simple computationsof highway travel (thus Distance=Speed x Time,
"simple"in the sense of presumedconstantspeed). His worldview fails
with respect to astronomicalspace/time, however, which requiresrelativity theory.Mendeliangenetics are not irrelevantto currenttheories of
reproductionand growth, but they are inadequate;hence the evolution
As
of molecularbiology andgene technology. formusic,in particular,
tonal
music: Tovey's approachto phrase structure,with its descriptions of
is
phraselengths and surfacecharacteristics, not incompatiblewith current theory.It is not sufficient,however. Lerdahland Jackendoff,Rothstein, Schachter,Schenker and others yield deeper insights. Much the
same complementaritymay be true with regardto Schoenberg'sideas
concerningunity, and the significantconcerns aboutthe uniquenessand
individualityof perception,cognition, construalof informationand the
like that have emanated from the critical theories of the postmodern
world.2
Misunderstandings and Misrepresentations in the Review
The points discussed above, stimulatedby Rothstein's review, contributeto the dialogue that any authormight hope a large study would
elicit. There are also, however,numerousmisunderstandings,
misrepreof
sentations,misconstrualsand misinterpretations ideas, concepts and
facts in ShapingTimethatfigurein Rothstein'stwenty-pagereview.These
must be corrected.
in
I cannotaddressall the pointsof misunderstanding the limitedspace
of this letter,but I will addresssome. They concernthe studies of accelerationandritard
foundin the book, as well as the model of rubatooffered
there.Additionally,I deal with distortionsof context that underlieother
issues discussed by Rothstein.
Case I. Re Acceleration and Ritard
I appreciateRothstein'sendorsement(133) of the study of acceleration andritardin ShapingTime.He misses, however,aspectsof the cubic
JacobFeldman,found charcurve shapethatI and my fellow researcher,
acterizes accelerationsand ritards(chapter 12). For example, Rothstein
(133) states: "An importantpoint is that, given any two points on a
graph-representing a beginning tempo, a goal tempo, and a length of
time between them-there is one and only one cubic curve thatcan connect them.This suggests (andEpsteinseems to encouragethe suggestion)
thatthereis one and only one 'ideal' ritard,or accelerando,between any
two given boundarytempos, but that is not quite true: a differentcubic
170

curve might be found that increases or decreases the length of time between the two stable tempos."
To say that "a differentcubic curve might be found that increases or
decreasesthe length of time between the two stable tempos"contradicts
one of the given conditionsthatRothsteindescribes,namely "a length of
time between [the two given points on the graph]." in this context of
For
a given condition,"alength"meansjust that-a length,a singular,unique,
one and only length. Rothstein's interpretation thus mathematically
is
false.
Moreover,to say thatthis set of givens "suggests ... thatthereis one
andonly one 'ideal'ritard,or accelerando,between any two given boundary tempos"is itself false. That statementimplies the generalizationof a
propositionthat in fact is true only for a specific condition-the unique,
given length of time between Rothstein'sgiven boundarypoints.
Rothstein confuses here the difference between a cubic curve and a
cubic spline, the latterdescribedin n.5 (555) of chapter 12 ("The cubic
curve in Example 12.2 fits within anothermathematicalclassification,
that of a spline-a curve that serves the function of joining two lines. It
can thus be describedas a cubic spline").A cubic spline is illustratedin
Example 12.2 of the chapter(420), its captionreinforcingthis definition:
"CubicSpline-the cubic curve X-Y smoothlyjoins the horizontallines
W-X andY-Z."Further
explanationis providedon the same page. Referto Example 12.2, the text explains that "we are presentedwith two
ring
horizontallines, W-X andY-Z, and the chargethatwe join them by a line
thatwill make a 'smooth'joint, ajoint whose connectionwith the straight
lines providesa maximallygradualtransition,devoid of abruptness."
Implicit in the example, andin the descriptions,arethe fixed positions of the
lines to be joined. Implicittherebyare the fixed positions of the X andY
points on these lines. It follows that these fixed positions bound a fixed
durationbetween the points.
The confusion is compoundedwhen Rothsteinstates: "This suggests
... that there is one and only one 'ideal' ritard,or accelerando,between
any two given boundarytempos."Yet furtherconfusion follows from his
statementthat"Epsteinseems to encouragethe suggestion." just seen,
As
Rothstein's initial given conditions describe a cubic spline. But cubic
splines do not "suggest";they are mathematicalfact.
Nor does Epstein"encourage suggestion." the contrary,
the
To
Epstein
and Feldmanrecognize and state a numberof times within this chapter
that cubic curves (as distinct from cubic splines) can vary individually
while retaining their generic identity. Though we do specify (421-22)
that "given the end points of such a [cubic] curve, there is only one trajectory that can be drawnbetween these points that will fit the mathematical descriptionof a cubic curve,"we furtherexplain (438) that dif171

ferences are found in specific embodimentsof the curve. Speaking of
the accelerationandritardperformancesstudiedin the chapter(438), we
state:"Whilethe four acceleration/ritard
examples viewed above adhere
to the model of a cubic curve with strikingfidelity, similaritiesand differences are also found in the applicationof the model. Karajan's
curves,
with their two potential versions and their bell-shaped kinetic aspects,
seem unique, as does the de Falla example, with its segmented sections
and step-downs.It is not surprisingthat diversitymight reign within the
constraintsof a prevalentmodel. It is also not unexpected,though it is
certainly striking, that formal prototypes or, more properly,subprototypes also exist within the confines of the model."
The point is amplifiedin n. 19 (558) of the chapter,viz.: "Itis clearthat
cubic curves, have somewhatdifall these curves, while mathematically
ferent shapes.In fact, not all cubic tempo curves look alike. Just as there
is a parameter
(slope) thatallows two straightlines to look differentfrom
each embodyingdegreesof freeeach other,thereare severalparameters,
dom, within the definitionof a cubic curve that allow the cubic shape to
vary from one example to another.Cubic curves are a small subset of all
curves,but still 'roomy'enough to permitsome varietyamongthem.The
data set (perforR2 [correlation],
relativeto a cubic curve, of a particular
mance sample) reflects how well thatdata set matchesthe nearest cubic
curve(i.e., the "bestfit").Differentdatasets with the same R2can be near
to different cubics, however. Hence data sets with similar R2may not
will
have similarshapes, althoughall data sets with high cubic-curve-R2
have a shape that correspondsto the special family of curves that are
cubic curves."
Aside from these explanations,it is visually obvious from the performance examples, graphedas cubic curves, that those curves embody a
acceleration(436, Example 12.7c) begins by
varietyof shapes.Karajan's
going the wrong way (i.e., retarding)before initiating the increase in
speed;it ends in a symmetricalbut oppositeway, acceleratingbeyondthe
to
end-goal tempo before returning(retarding) it. The accelerationin the
de Falla work (431/432, Examples 12.6b/c) is of markedlydifferentprofile. Further, coefficientsof the x, x2,andx3componentsof the curves,
the
notablyin the Stravinskyand Dvorakritards(respectively425, Example
12.4b, and 427, Example 12.5b), are also different,indicatingvia quantitativemeans the distinctivenessof the individualcurves (which is why
this informationis provided).The Himou curve (446) differsfrom all the
others, not only in durationbut in profile as well. Last but hardlyleast,
the five curves of Example 12.9e (444), capturingthe profiles of five riare
tards in performancesof Schumann'sTrdumerei, notably different.
these difThey have been normalized,in fact, specificallyto demonstrate
ferences. (Normalizingis explainedin n. 19, p. 558.)
172

Case II. Re Rubato
Rothstein's discussion (131-32) of the model for rubato offered in
chapter11 of ShapingTimeis quitemistaken.He correctlyportraysa primary aspect of the model (131), namely the proportionalphase fit
between the lengths of beats and phraseson the most fundamentallevel
of the model (Level I). The errorsbegin a step beyond this point.
Item.I establisha ? 10%rangeof deviationfroma whole-number
phase
fit of beat duration-to-phrase
duration,recognizing, as Rothstein (131)
accuratelyreports,that absoluteprecisioncannotbe expected. Rothstein
(same page) fails to provide context, however,when he quotes my comment that these "limits are admittedlypunishinglysevere and restrictive
of
([Epstein], 377)." He thus obscures an understanding what this criterion may representand why. Moreover,given the tone of Rothstein'sdiscussion ("onewould suspectEpsteinof scholarlymalpractice.. ." [131];
"This is the Looking-Glass school of cognitive science.. ." [132]), and
for
lacking adequatebackground this "punishinglysevere"comment,the
commentcan appeartrivial.It is not. The reasoningbehindthis ?10% criterion, ignored by Rothstein, is providedwithin chapter 11 of the book
(376-77), viz.:
"In pursuing the case studies that follow, some criterion has been
sought by which to discernacceptabledeviationsfrom discrepanciesbeyond the allowablepale. It is not an easy search;ready-madecriteriaare
hardly available. Most studies concerned with limits of temporal perception have dealt with time periods considerablydifferentfrom those
found here, bounded in the main by the psychological present,that allimportantperiod of ca. 0.5-2 sec., which seems to function as a 'window' within which so much informationis perceivedand processed.It is
within this spherethat the 5 percentWeberFractionregardingtime perception functions."(376f.) 3
I continue (377): "Acuityof temporalperceptionseems to diminish
rapidly as the perceptionperiod widens. (Recall that Getty [1975] and
Mach [1865] found the WeberFractionto rise steeply aftertwo seconds.)
To apply the criteriaof small-scale timings to rubatostudies is unrealistic ... [for] the temporalperiods within which the period/phasecorrelations take place rangefrom beats minimallyof 281 msec. to entireworks
thatcover a numberof minutes,the latterdurationswell beyond the psychological present."
"In the absence of availablecriteriawe have constructedan artificial
criterion,with limits that are admittedlypunishingly severe and restrictive [the ?10% discussed above] ... This is a tough standard, be sure,
to
if we recall thatGetty's test of the WeberFractionfound this
particularly
tolerance [10-11.5 percent] in time perceptionslimited to 2.8 sec. Our
durational
periods for phraseson Level I are far beyond these bounds."4
In sum, the phrasedurationsin the three works studiedin this rubato
173

chaptercover a spectrumfrom 3.228 sec. to 19.753 sec. The majorityof
the durationslie within double digits. They thus exceed by many orders
of magnitudethe 2.5 sec. upperlimit of the psychological present.Conversely,the 10%criterionfor discrepancyis ordersof magnitudesmaller
thanthe Getty andMach findingsof the JND for time periodsbeyondthe
psychological present. Given this context, "severe,"arguably"punishingly severe,"do not seem exaggerateddescriptionsof the ?10% criterion.
Item.Withinhis same discussionof phase fit Rothstein(131-32) states
that "he [Epstein]finds that some phrases do not meet his 'punishingly
severeandrestrictive'
criteria(thoughmanydo).And so he redefineswhat
he means by 'beat.'He substitutesthe notion of 'groundbeat'."
This is a distortionof both contextandmeaning.Beat andgroundbeat
are not two differentthings in this model. Nor is groundbeat a redefinition, much less a substitutefor the concept of beat. Nor in any way is the
term groundbeat invoked as a Deus ex machina, broughtinto play, as
Rothsteinimplies, to rescue a failing situation.
A groundbeat is the metric beat that Rothstein (131) describes as a
hypotheticallymetronomicbeat. ("He [Epstein]first describes the phenomenon, sensibly enough, as a dichotomybetween the performedbeat
and a hypotheticallycontinuedmetronomicbeat...") The term ground
beat indicatesthefunction fullfilled by the metric beat in the rubatoparadigm. This functionaldistinction,and the relationshipof the termsbeat
and groundbeat, are explicit in passages within the chapterthat lay out
the model and its properties,viz.:
"Further
implicit in both views of romanticrubatois the fascinating
phenomenonof two separateanddifferenttime controlsoperatingsimultaneouslyas the phraseor othermusical segmentprogresses.Thereis the
strict metric control of the beat-the hypotheticallyinvarianttime unit
thatserves as the groundelementfor timing. Moving in parallelwith this
is the pulse of varioussegmentsof the phrase,a pulse distortedby rubato
as a means of enhancingmusical expression."(Epstein, 373. Emphasis
added.)
I continue: "These two time controls ["metricbeat" and "pulse"],
really systems of time control, rapidlybecome dissynchronousand thus
in conflict",thoughthereis an "eventualreconciliationof these two sysof
tems, theirreturnto phase synchrony... This resynchronization beat
and pulse lies within the extremebounds of the phraseitself. It is at the
phrase end... that the two systems realign."Note 4 (549), which concerns this point, furthermakes the link between beat and ground beat:
"Theidea that an underlyingground beat should returninto phase synchrony at the end of a phraseis implicit in much thinkingabout rubato
today.. ." (373. Emphasisadded.)
Additionally,on p. 374 of the chapter,is the following: "The terms
174

describe the phenomenondiscussed earlier [373], in
[Periodicity/Phase]
which two parallel differenttiming systems run simultaneously.One of
these systems, the metric, establishes the basic, or ground,period that
will underliethe full phrase or, on broaderlevels, a largermusical segment. On the level of phrase, this ground period is the beat. Working
against it is the pulse of various phrase segments, whose rhythmictimings are distortedvia rubato."
(Emphasisadded.)
Groundbeat and beat, as terms and as function, are thus clearly set
forth and explained.
Item. Rothstein(132) claims the following: "It is obvious that, given
a single groundbeat and an allowance of +10%, any randomlyselected
phrase length has a 20% chance of meeting Epstein's requirementsfor
phase fit."
Rothstein'slanguage,with its invocationof chance, is the languageof
indeed he explicitly characterizes and consequentcalcuthis
probability;
lations (132, paragraph2) as probabilities.Probabilitydoes not follow
from his claim, however.What Rothsteindoes is depict a 20% criterion
of range as a probability,which it is not.
Determinationof probabilitywould require clear delineation of the
elements whose interrelationships
give rise to such a probability.Rothstein's statement,however,is unclear.Whatdoes "anyrandomlyselected
phrase length" mean? The possibilities are two: 1) any phrase selected
randomly,thatphrasepresumedto have a given length;or 2) anyphrase
the
length selected randomly.Grammatically, second statementis correct. But the data of these rubatostudies do not reflect randomphrases,
or randomphrase lengths; the studies present specific lengths, those of
specific performances.Moreover,the formulationof probabilitywould
entail computationsdifferentfrom Rothstein'sstatement.
Thus Rothstein does not present probabilityhere. As noted above,
what his 20% figure describes is range-namely, the range of allowed
discrepancyfrom an integer fit of ground beat-to-phraselength. This,
the
however,is redundant; informationis a given of the model. The new
contribution the conversionof ?10% to 20%.
is
Item. Rothstein(132, paragraph describesa test he performson the
2)
data provided in chapter 11 concerning Novaes's performanceof the
ChopinA-minorMazurka,op. 17, no. 4. In his words:"Itook the six possible groundbeats as performedby Novaes in the firstphraseof the Mazurka-since ground beats are performedlengths, they differ in every
phrase-and I chose two extremes, 12.691 and 17.223 seconds, based on
multiples of my groundbeats. (In the outer sections of the Mazurka,all
but one of Novaes's phraselengths fall between these extremes.)Then I
determined,based on the 10% criterion,which ranges of durationsbetween my extremes would constitute acceptablephase fits. The answer
was slightly above 75%," which Rothstein identifies as a probability,
175

namely:"Thus,if Novaes's firstphrasehad measuredanywherebetween
12.691 and 17.223 seconds, it would have had roughly a 75% chance of
meeting Epstein's 'punishinglysevere' criteria...."
I find it difficultto follow Rothstein'scalculations,since his descriptions of method and the data he provides are spare. It is unclear,moreof
over, whetherhis characterization his figuresas probabilitiesis mathin
ematically appropriate, view of the discussion of probabilityfound
above.
Rothstein'sapproach
seems partlybaseduponhis intuitionsaboutpossibilities of the data,ratherthanupon the dataof chapter11 themselves,
which are factual.But in terms of this intuitiveapproachare his derived
data"hard," real,or arethey,so to speak,mathematical
i.e.,
"paraphrases"?
For
Further,are his data properlyinterrelated? example, Rothstein explains, "I chose two extremes, 12.691 and 17.223 seconds."Why these
choices? Only because "all but one of Novaes's phrase lengths fall between these extremes"?Or, additionally,because they are "basedupon
multiples of my ground beats"-i.e., based upon Rothstein's selected
multiplesof his selected groundbeats?
It is also not clearwhetherRothsteinsimplyderivesthesephraselengths
from 11 phrasesin the piece (the outer sections), or whetherthese criteria are applied to other phrases, though his basis for this choice, as he
explains it, is durationsperformedonly in thefirst phrase.There seems
in this last point a potentialcontradiction. more,is this intuitivechoice
Yet
carried out to the exclusion of other data that directly apply to other
phrases?
Is there somethingof a self-fullfilling process here? Come up with a
duration,thatis, found partlythroughan intuitivesense of its "rightness"
ratherthanas a matterof fact; multiplythe durationa numberof times to
then findthatthe governingduraachieve another,"governing"
duration;
tion relates within a certainmarginto the firstduration.Or do I misrepresent Rothstein?Given his limited explanationof method, and in the
absence of otherdataor of computations,it is hardto know.
Rothstein'smethod and my study seem significantlydifferentin one
respect: from what he explains, his material seems created from other
data,thusone step removedfromthe facts. My studyuses the factualdata
of actualperformance.
The absence of data in Rothsteinis critical. He provides nothing but
two durations.He offers no calculations,nor the mathematicalperspectives thatjustify observationsor conclusions drawnfrom these calculations. Thus readersmust accept his conclusions on faith, though faith is
not a relevantmodus operandi.Absent full presentationof his material,
and the opportunitytherebyfor evaluation,neitherhis argumentnor his
conclusions are adequate.
This is the most complex and diffiItem. Groundbeat determination.
176

cult aspect of this model. I am not fully satisfied with the solutions in
chapter11. In this respect Rothsteinand I agree.We drawdifferentconclusions aboutthe matter,however.From his discussion I gatherthat he
would scrap the entire enterprise.I do not see it that way. There is evidence here of a significantphenomenon.It will requiremore development and, very likely, different and more sophisticated mathematical
it
techniquesto pinpointthe phenomenonand demonstrate convincingly.
Rothsteinis awareof the difficultyof identifyingthe beat thatcarries
a tempo, though he discusses it only minimally ("the definitionof 'firm
tempo' in a rubatophraseis a tricky thing" [132]). I describe it in more
detail, noting that "althoughwe may hear a rubatoperformancewith a
generalsense of a common underlyingpulse, thatpulse is in fact often in
flux. The changes are generallysubtle, and heardover the span of phrase
time theirdifferencesarebecloudedby the stresses,pulls, andexpressive
affect of the phrasesthemselves" (385). I continue:"The operativeunit
of pulse is not always clear in a performancethat continually shifts its
ground.Whatit may appearto be dependsupon one's perceptions,rhythmic reflexes, personalsense of pulse, and feeling for phraseorganization
among small distinctions in timing and duration.Often, too, as in this
piece [ChopinMazurka,op. 17, no. 4], the music hoversin an in-between
state, not really moving in 3 or fully in 1 either,but oscillating continually between these poles. That is the import of the many phrases here
where the groundbeat was found to vary"(387).
Those severalfactors-a pulse not really moving in 3 or fully in 1, an
underlyingpulse often in flux, an operativepulse in a performancethat
continuallyshifts its ground-make it "atrickything"to nail down a single unit of beat, even a single location of beat. Thus the majorquestion:
with respect to a ChopinMazurkaor Waltzmoving partlyin 1, partlyin
note may alterna3, is it reasonableto suggest thatthe bar or the quarter
tively be functioningas the groundbeat?A "yes" answeris easy if both
durations
make an integerfit with the phraselength.But whatif one duration does, and the other does not? Do we disallow one or the other, or
both, based upon the statistical need for consistency of unit across all
such phrases?Thatdecision may satisfy the statistician,but does it reveal
or does it mask musical phenomena?
The problemis not limited to bar-or-beat
dimensions.Thereinlies my
sense that this issue requiresa differentmode of mathematicalanalysis.
I discuss this shortly.
Viewed within the frameworkof Shaping Time, however, certainly
thereare consistentpatternsof events in these performances-consistent
to an extent that suggests something significant is going on along the
lines of the model. If we grantthe firstbar,or the firstquarter
note within
thatbar,statusas a groundbeat, for instance,then within the Mazurkaas
played by Novaes 10 of the 15 phrases-67%-fulfill the ground beat
177

role.5To this we can add phrase6 which, unlike otherphrases,begins in
rubato,its groundbeat thus occupying the full second bar of the phrase.
(See Example 11.ld, p. 386.) Further,all phrases other than no. 6, as
in
noted on p. 387, areplayed such thatthe groundbeat is articulated the
beginningpartof the phrase.
In the Brahmsexample(Example11.3c, p. 411), all 14 phrases(100%)
embody the singularentity of a quarternote as groundbeat. All phrases
likewise place this groundbeat at the head of the phrase-either upon its
upbeat or upon the following quarternote, the phrase downbeat.This
within a piece where, as the text discusses (406-15), the structureitself
bears ambiguousdispositionsof phrases.6
I cannotclaim equal success in this respect with regardto the Lipatti/
ChopinWaltz.In partthis may be a shortcomingof the model in its pilot
version, which to me suggests all the more the need for a different,more
mathematical
mode of analysis.Inpartthis may also lie with
sophisticated
within the
the complex ways thatLipattishapestimings and articulations
Waltz,as discussed in my text (395-401). Yet therearepatternsand correlations.The matteris not readyfor finaljudgment.
Are theremorepromisingmodes of mathematical
analysis?I thinkso.
I, in collaborationwith colleagues in neurology and mathematicsat the
medical school of the Universityof Dusseldorf, am currentlyat work on
this. We anticipatean articlein the nearfuture.Among the resultsof work
alreadypublishedis an articleby Largeand Jones (1999) thatpresentsa
computermodel for detectingperiodicitiesamongdisparateandcomplex
timing data. Essentially the computercomparesand cross-correlatesall
data, algorithms of the program discerning therein periodic patterns.
and
the
Phase entrainment phase attractors, latteran outgrowthof chaos
is
theory,figurein these algorithms.Equallyimportant the book by Tass
to
(1999) thatpresentsa new theoreticalapproach phaseresettingandthe
of
and
stimulation-induced
synchronization desynchronization a population of oscillators[neurons].Tass'smodel parallels,in its scientificmode,
of
much of the phase synchrony/dyssynchrony groundbeat and phrase
offered in the rubatomodel in Shaping Time.Tass uses stochasticmethods from statisticalmechanics in working out his model and in presenting his results,some of the latterevidencedby dataobtainedby MEG and
EEG studies.
elements of the mathematicsof
Jones and Boltz (1989), incorporating
dynamic systems, is anothersource of similarly oriented studies, as is
McAuley and Kidd (1998), with its perspectivesof neuralperiodicityas
the product of dynamic, adaptive oscillators. Additionally, Drake and
Botte (1993) contributeto the growing awarenessthat time discrimination and its acuity,thatthe JustNoticeable Difference and the like, seem
to be context dependent.
178

Case III. Distortions of Context (A): Misconstrual; Exaggeration;
The "Fiction Factor"
Rothstein'scriticisms contain numerousdistortionsof context. Some
of these are achieved by misconstrual,relatingconcepts and arguments
thatare not relatedby the authornor intendedto be so related.Additionally, Rothsteintends to drive distortedcontexts to exaggeration.
A second mode of distortion,drawingupon what I have dubbedthe
A
"FictonFactor."
exacerbatesthe misconstrual
approach: set of concepts,
falsified via misconstrual,is presentedas a point of view advocatedby
the author.
This fictionalview is thenattacked the reviewer.
This resemby
bles the "StrawMan"tacticdefinedby an earliergeneration,wherebyone
creates a fictive figureonly to knock him down.
I sample two such cases here:
Item. Rothstein (126-27) quotes three passages about proportional
tempo found in Shaping Time,offering them as "passagesin which Epstein's core belief is revealed."He follows with this statement:"Thelast
in
quotationis especially characteristic, thatEpsteingives the performer
latitude with one hand only to take it away with the other.After all, he
sniffs, 'some of us are more gifted than others'when it comes to matters
of tempo ([Epstein], 362). This is a truismin any aspect of musical performance-or of analysis, for thatmatter-but it is tasteless to stateit so
baldly"(Rothstein, 127).
Both misconstrualand the "FictionFactor"arerepresented
here, conin a four-stepprocess:
joined
Step 1 presents the three passages about proportionaltempo-Epstein's alleged core belief. (Two of these quotatons,given in full, are discussed laterin this letter.See Case IV, thirdItem.)
Step 2 presents the quote "'some of us are more gifted than others'
when it comes to mattersof tempo."
Step 3 conjoins the quotes of Steps 1 and 3 via Rothstein'sstatement
that "the last quotationis especially characteristic, that Epstein gives
in
the performerlatitude...."
Step 4. This connection established, Rothstein attacksit. ("This is a
truismin any aspect of musicalperformance... but it is tasteless to state
it so baldly.")
The process is not a simple one, however.For one thing, two of my
three passages concerned with proportionaltempo are skewed when
quotedin Rothstein'sreview.As I show laterin this letter (Case IV, third
Item), the reviewer distortstheir contexts by adding emphases that turn
their meanings.
Further,the passage in Step 2 is presentedcompletely out of context
with respectto the quotes of Step 1. Nor were they intendedto be related.
Indeed, Rothstein's "the last quotation is especially characteristic..."
quote is separatedfrom the "some of us are more gifted .. ."passage by
179

over 200 pages. The latterphrasein fact arises from a considerationof
ideas of Noam Chomsky-ideas concerninginnatecompetenceand"peras
formance," he sees these matterswith respectto language,andthe light
shed on an aspect of tempo in music.
they may
In demonstrating point, it is helpful to review the summaryof the
this
cross-culturalstudy of tempo which is found on pp. 359-63 of Epstein,
chapter9-a chaptertotally ignoredby Rothstein,as pointedout earlier.
The summarydraws a number of conclusions about the study, among
them the fact that "when tempos changed in the various musics [of the
seven culturesunder study], they changed by low-orderintegralratios."
the
"if
Further, the newly arrived-at
tempo was not exactly in proportion,
deviation in time from this exact ratio was in the majorityof cases so
small that it was below both the orderthresholdof perception(PT) and
the WeberFraction(WF)"(359).
The summaryalso notes that"proportional
tempo is a constantin this
study-an unchangingfactor among musical examples of widely varying cultures, and of varying affect, emotional states, purposes, and set..., of
tings. It exists in music of processionals,of privateentertainment
ceremonies and large social gatherings,of games, even in the rhythms
and tempos accompanyingbarterand bargain..., these musics distributed widely across the globe. This suggests both a musical and an aesthetic constant, as well as a musical/aestheticconstraint. Finally, this
study supportsthe premise suggested in earlierchapters-that an innate
biological function seems to be the basis for this tempo phenomenon.It
is difficultto see any otherbasis. Certainlyit strainscredibilityto propose
that such closely correlatedtempos across so many culturesare a matter
of acculturation
alone, or the result of chance.
"This universalitysuggests a mutualneurophysiology.Thus genetic,
biological constraintsmay underlie musical performance.These constraintsmay augment,as well as underlie,those otherbases of authority,
of tradition,and of intuitionthathave heretoforebeen the sources of our
musical trainingand musical thinking"(359-62).
A question arises from this discussion. "Why,if proportional
tempos
are natural,do roughly 20 percent of the performancesin this study lie
outside this practice-not to mention similar exceptions in the performance of Westernartmusic?"(362).
Among the suggested answers are implications of Chomsky's theories, viz.: "The notion of competence and performance,as developed
by Noam Chomsky[as perlisted citations]with regardto linguistics,may
be applicableto this areaof music. Chomskyhas determinedthathuman
beings everywhere possess an innate competence for understanding
and
grammar syntaxin language.It is this inbornabilitythatallows us to
childhooddevelopment.
learnournativelanguageas partof our 'natural'
Nevertheless,thoughvirtuallyall of us know our nativetongue, we vary
180

in the ability,complexity,even elegance with which we speak('perform')
that language. Thus performancevaries within universal,innate competence.
"So it may well be with music, specifically,in this instance,regarding
tempo. We may well possess a universalcompetence to feel tempos in
relationto a pulse, and to relatethatpulse itself in momentsof changing
tempos.The degreeof precision(andgrace,elegance, fluency)with which
we effect these tempo changes, however, may vary with individuals.In
effect, some of us are more gifted than others"(362.)
Thereinthe contextfor the last sentenceabove.As noted earlier,Rothstein quotes it completely out of context.
The final stage: Rothstein'sconnective sentence (Step 3) conjoins the
disparatequotationsof Steps 1 and2. He establishestherebythe fictitious
which he then attackswith languagesuggestiveof one who has
argument
been morallyoffended (Step 4).
Item.Rothstein(128) findsthe ideas aboutproportional
tempoin Shaping Time"contradicted both compositionaland performancepractice
by
in the eighteenth and nineteenthcenturies"in that, among other things,
"movementsof a symphonywere often not performedtogetheron a proby
might be separated other
gram;the firsttwo movements,in particular,
instrumental vocal pieces. At thepremiereof Beethoven'sViolin Conand
certo, the soloist improvised between the first and second movements
(with the violin held upside down, apparently).Were such interpolated
to
pieces or improvisationsto be performedin temposproportional those
of the surrounding
movements?The very questionis absurd ...."
Indeed,the last statementis absurd.But it is Rothstein's,not mine. No
such claim is made in the book.
The essence of Rothstein'scriticismis not absurd,but it is illogical. It
conjoins two issues that are essentially separate:the composition of a
work, with all the structural,
syntacticaland other relationships,procedures, processes and such that are involved with composition;and what
a society at some period of historyopts to do with that work.
Following the premises of his argumentcertainlygets us into muddy
waters. Leaving tempo mattersaside, are we to assume that because of
concertpracticessuch as Rothsteindescribes,majorcomposersintended
no significantrelationshipsamong the movementsof a multi-movement
work?Thatall thatlies acrossthese movementsis ad hoc? Whatof works
in which ideas fromone movementreturn another-or, in opera,among
in
differentacts?
the
How shallwe characterize BeethovenFifthandNinthSymphonies,
as well as his op. 131 Quartet(see note 7, below), the BrahmsThirdSymphony, the corer movements of Mozart Divertimento,K.136, (and his
symphonies discussed in some detail in Shaping lime [173-93]), the
MahlerFirstandFourthSymphonies,the SchumannPianoConcerto(six181

bar transition,movement II to III) and Piano Quintet,the Tchaikowsky
FourthSymphony,the Dvorak String Serenade and Cello Concerto, to
mention but a few examples? By Rothstein'sreasoning (129) these are
"extremecases," mostly prevalentin the nineteenthcentury.What constitutes "extreme"?
Numberof cases? Natureof the relationships?Era?
Does "extreme"
encompass the fact that these works, with the arguable
in
exception of the Beethoven Fifth, are not "tightlyintegrated" the extensive sense to which Rothstein refers?That they make no more than
cameos of memory (the MahlerFourth
momentaryrecalls, "flashback"
in fact a "flashahead"predictionof the finalmovement),or shareGrundgestalt characteristics?
Additionally,what of the returnsof the two differentchorales in the
Bach "SaintMatthewPassion,"some of these returnsreset, all of them
with differenttext? And if nineteenthcenturyopera is allowable in this
discussion, what of the brief returningstrainsof "Mi chiamano Mimi"
(Act 1) as Mimi lies dying in Act 4 of "La Boheme"-not to mention
Wagner'sever recurringleitmotives?
What of the numerous Grundgestaltinterconnectionsin numerous
works of the eighteenthand nineteenthcenturiesthathave been demonstratedby a numberof analysts?I refer here not to the conventionalkey
relationshipsor successionsof genretypes mentionedby Rothstein(129),
relationsof theme, rhythm,dynamics,articulations
but to deep-structure
and the like.7
Rothstein(129f), perhapsunintentionally,
invokesthe "FictionFactor"
when discussing the comparativeapproachof inter-opusstudies, which
look at works throughouta genre, and the intra-opusapproachwhich
focuses upon a specific work. The validity of either approachis not in
question. But the either/orcontext that underliesRothstein'sdiscussion
are
is certainlyquestionable.
These approaches in no way mutuallyexcluThe
sive. If anything,they are complementary. inter-opusapproachgeneralizes;the intra-opusapproach
Moving from the general
particularizes.
to the particular commonplacethinking.It is formalizedin the biologis
ical sciences; thus genus, and species.
viz.: Thereexisted throughThe point appliesto Rothstein'sargument,
centuriesnumerous
danceforms(genres)
outtheeighteenthandnineteenth
character the
and
of
markedby characteristics meter,tempo, articulation,
like. Composersdrewuponthese sourcesfor specific works, at times preserving these characteristics,at other times abstractingthe music some
distancefrom its roots. Thus the allemandes,courantes,gigues, minuets,
and
sarabandes such in J.S. Bach's keyboardpartitas,cello suites andthe
like, the minuetsof HaydnandMozartsymphonies,sonatas,stringquartets and such.
None of this will be news to readersof this letter.Rothstein'sprimary
point, however,thatgenre and inter-opusconsiderationsoutweigh, if not
182

exclude, internal structuralmatters (intra-opusconcerns), can lead to
strangeconclusions.Takingthe Bach keyboardpartitasor the cello suites
as cases in point, why should we not freely mix the allemandes, courminuetsand such amongthe differentsuites, or among
antes, sarabandes,
the various partitas,respectingthe majoror minor modes of the works,
and transposingthe movements so that they fit the proper key?8 Most
musicians,I suspect,will be skepticalof such a proposition(as am I). But
if that scheme is not viable, then internalrelationships-considerations
of motivic shape,harmonicand motivic patterns,otherGrundgestaltdetails, and probablytempo matters-must play a role vis-a-vis coherence.
Similar concerns pertainto tempi as found in minuets among works
of Mozart-an issue that Rothstein (128ff.) discusses. Rothstein (129)
to
findsme dismissive of Marty'sinter-opusapproach this matter.Not so.
I point out, however,thatMarty's"studywould be yet more valuable ...
had he explored the ramificationsof his [inter-opus]observationswith
respect to tempo connectionswithin entirepieces" (Epstein,527, n. 12).
I continueto think so.
A look amongthe minuetsin variousMozartsymphonies,stringquartets, and the two piano sonatas with such movements illustrates this
point. The tempo terms, and the speed categoriesto which they presumably apply, are not sharplydefined among these movements, and there
are overlaps as well. This suggests that compostional calculations beyond those exploredby Martymay be at work within individualworks.
the
Consider followingsample,forexample.Amongtheminuetsmarked
Allegretto,using as a referencetempos commonlyheardin our age which
I and, I suspect, many othersfind plausible,I hearcommonalitiesamong
the symphonies 28, 39, and 41, and the stringquartetin Eb, K. 428. All
of these move within a range of 132-to-ca.138 to the quarter(thoughthe
feels more in quasi-onethanthe others).Yet the D-majorquar"Jupiter"
tets, K. 499 and K. 575, both carrying the same Allegretto indication,
move notably faster, the quarterat about 152-160 (again, some feeling
But
more in 3, othersmore in 1 or "in-between"). the minuetof the quartet in C, K. 465, markednot AllegrettobutAllegro, also moves at ca. 160
in
(possibly a hairfaster),andthe minuetof K. 458, the quartet Bb,marked
Moderato,moves at the lower range of the Allegrettoexamples (quarter
ca. 132, perhapsslightly less).
The categories, in other words, are not exclusive. There may be correlationsof key and other aspects of genre such as Rothsteinand Marty
describe, though I'm not convinced they are always clearly to be delineated or in all instances necessarily salient. However that issue may decided, the perplexitiesof tempo and tempo designationspersist.9
The problem is yet more complex, for any of these minuets can
andmay well have been plausiblyexperiencedat temposperhaps5-10%
faster or slower-all the more so in our time, when early music perfor183

mances have grown ever more prominent,side by side with traditions
from our own century and those inheritedfrom the nineteenthcentury.
not
lie?
Where,then, does "validity," to mention "authenticity,"
It is in this contextthatI findthe intra-opusapproachsignificant-and
not only with respectto Mozartminuets.Internal
correspondences
among
movements, inclusive of tempi; Grundgestaltvarieties of coherencein
these have been discussed and demonstrated our era. Nor, I repeat,are
they incompatiblewith the generalizationsof inter-opusstudies. As for
the fact thatBach reworkedinstrumental
pieces for use in the cantatas,or
that Beethoven shifted the original finale of the A-majorViolin Sonata,
sonata(Rothstein,128):
op. 30, no. 1, to anotherworkin A, the "Kreutzer"
this does not disprovethe intra-opusperspective.The shifts and reworkings denote interestingincidents,not prevalentpractice.
Case IV. Distortions of Context (B): Omissions:
Further misconstruals
I have discussed some of these already(the quotecited in Case III, first
Item; the firsttwo Items concernedwith rubato,Case II). Furtherexamples follow here-again, only a sampling.
Item. Rothstein(128): "CertainlyEpstein often throwscaution to the
winds, as when he adduces the mere appearanceof markingssuch as a
tempoor TempoI as evidence for proportional
tempos ([Epstein], 154)."
Rothsteinchooses not to mentionthe termDoppio movimento,seemrelationship,though it is
ingly an incontestableexample of proportional
includedin my sentencethathe quotes (Epstein, 154, top of page). Moreover, the text on p. 154 is a summaryof a two-chapterdiscussion of biological and historical bases for proportionaltempo (Epstein, 109-55).
The relationshipof 1:1 is seen thereinas one of these proportions,
viewed
in the context of connections among movements.A tempo, on the other
hand, is supportable,
obviously, only if a basic tempo has been departed
from and then returns.These contexts are not providedby the reviewer.
The chapter on biology includes extensive discussion, replete with
sources, of the periodic natureof neural firings-the basis for our socalled "biologicalclocks."It furtherdiscusses the neurophysical(neuromuscular)entrainment which the nervous system adaptsto periodiciby
ties. I suggest in the course of these discussions that if an established
musical tempo can be characterizedas periodic, it would seem both
and
caused by neuralentrainment an example of it. Thereinlies the logic
of my remarkabouta tempo.It make sense in this context, as it denotes
a departure
from an establishedtempo and a subsequentreturnto it, the
returnlinked with this function of neuralentrainment.
Nothingaboutthese chapters,theirdiscussions,theirsources,the summaryof them on p. 154, northe contextthey providefor my point,is indicated in Rothstein'sremark.
184

Item.Rothstein(131): "Epsteinis not aboveplayingfast andloose with
the data. Thus, in his discussion of Mozart's G-minor Symphony, K.
550-the best andmost extensive of his Mozartanalyses-Epstein in one
place (185) omits the firsttwo eighth-notesof the firstviolins, ES-D,when
measuringthe largermotive of the ascendingsixth;a few pages later(192)
he includes the same pair of eighths in measuringthe same motive. The
between this motivic
reasonis simple. In the formercase, the proportions
statementand two later ones 'work' only if the upbeatis omitted;in the
is
lattera differenttempo plan, also proportional, used, and now the two
become necessary for the relationshipto 'work'-and so
eighth-notes
they are restored.Epstein is nothing if not pragmatic:if a 36-inch yardstick doesn't give the desiredresults,he will use another,of 37 inches, or
34 1/2. But he'll still call it a yard,andhe'll still ask the readerto takehis
measurementsseriously."
of
Again, misconstruals text, distortionsof context,falsification.Roththat
stein merges arguments areseparate,anddistinctlydifferent,as I preconclusions. To wit:
sent them. He then drawsunwarranted
Discussion I. Page 192 ends a discussionof one plausibleset of tempo
relations.Some observationsbased upon those relationsareconcludedin
the firstparagraph thatpage.
of
Discussion II. A second set of plausible relations is then discussed,
2,
beginning in paragraph viz.: "In closing, we should note anotheroft
heardtempointerpretation this symphonythatis fully compatiblewith
of
this discussion.It bringsthe firstandlast movementsinto a 1:1 alignment
of tempo by means of a small, but flexible, range of pulse that moves
between M.M. ca. 132-138...." I then discuss tempo propertiesseen
within this differentplan.
Re Discussion I:
Discussion I includes two examples. Concerning the initial tempo
scheme (firstexample):Rothsteinis correctthatI omitthe firsttwo eighthnotes of the first violins, Eb-D [the phraseupbeat],when measuringthe
largermotive of the ascendingsixth (Epstein, 185, Example 8.4b). Rothstein is wrong to say that "a few pages later (192) he [Epstein]includes
the same pair of eighths in measuringthe same motive" (Example 8.4i,
191-the second example).
I do not do so. Moreover,I deal with two completelydifferentthings
in these two examples.The firstexampleassesses pitcheswithin a motive.
The second is comcered with textures, dynamics, harmonies, instrumentationwithin passages in two differentmovements. I note the presence of the same motive in both examples, but I am not concerned with
Thus my text, regardthis motive in connection with any measurements.
ing the second example:
elements is heardat the closing passages
"Anotherset of interrelated
185

of the developmentsin these corer movements.... The passages are
seen in Example 8.4i. Again their affinitiesare striking.In each case the
half-step motive Eb-D is exploited (the invertedC#-D as well, in moveharmentI) with a full tuttisound,fortedynamic,andlargelycomparable
and instrumentalregisters have much in
monies. The instrumentation
common, notablyin cellos, basses, and bassoons, and the melodic regishas
teris also the same."(191. Textnotrelevant beenexcised to save space.)
I next lay out criteriaby which to measurethese passages: "Thereare
various ways to view these passages comparatively,since the prolongation of the dominantin movement I goes well beyond the forte phrase
indicated here." (191-92) This done, I note the measurement:"If we
compare only the forte passages in each movement, which provides a
similar base of characteristics,we find the the first-movementphrase,
with a durationof eight bars [my emphasis], amountsto 16 seconds at
half=100. The phrasein movementIV [fourbars long, self evident from
the example] lasts 4.35 seconds, yielding a proportionbetween the two
phrasesof 4:1, with a discrepancyof 8.8 percent(again a figureof questionable significance, given the time span between the two segments)"
(192).10
Clearly,as denoted by my emphasis, it is the bar that is measurednot the barplus upbeat,as Rothsteinmisunderstands;
simply the bar,and
collections of bars. (The example in question,Ex. 8.4i, p. 191, is reproduced below.) Thus two differentthings are discussed in Discussion I:
1) Measurementof the D-Bb motive; 2) A second set of measurements
thatdeals with othermatters.Even despitethis-despite the fact thatthese
are
measurements not related,the upbeatsare not includedin eithermeasurement.Rothstein'scriticismis false.
Re Discussion II:
The first issue concluded, I next discuss the second set of plausible
2,
temporelationships(Discussion II, beginningat paragraph p. 192), ex1I5

U.1

Wf

fif

I

_

f

"
9'

.F

Source:Epstein, ShapingTime, 1995.
By permissionof SchirmerBooks

186

features(motives, accompaniment
ploring differentaspects of structural
figures, altered characterof themes, paradoxicalperceptions of speed,
etc.) occasioned by the new relationships.
This new perspectiveinvolves new criteria,which apply throughout.
Thus, as partof this discussion I observe that:"themotivic span from D
to the upperBb, structurally
prominentin the opening themes of movement I, III, and IV [see Example 8.4b], now occupies four beats in each
instance,if we alterourmode of reckoningto include in all cases the beat
that contains the upbeat [my emphasis]. Because all these movements
move at the same beat speed, the durationspan of the motives is now the
same"(192, paragraph
4).
Here, too, Rothsteinis off the mark.As just shown, this is a second,
The new tempos, not surpriscompletely differentcase of measurement.
occasion differentdegrees of relationship.In assessing them, the
ingly,
same yardstick(i.e., the upbeat) of measurementis applied across the
board.
In sum, Rothsteinconfuses and melds two separateand distinctlydifferent discussions of tempo. He misreadstheir criteriaof measurement,
whatI have written,what
andcomes up with statementsthatmisrepresent
I observe, and what I claim. Readerscan assess the mannerin which he
does so.
Item.As mentionedearlier,Rothstein(128) speaksof "Epstein'srigid
adherenceto a Schoenbergianstandardof unity."On p. 126 Rothstein
speaks in somewhat the same vein, quoting "threepassages in which
Epstein's core belief is revealed."I offer the firsttwo of these:
"The study also suggests that proportional
tempo, tempo united by a
common pulse, may be the clue to a 'proper'sense of tempo, leading to
tempos that work in the most successful way in terms of musical affect
(195, emphasis added [by Rothstein])."
relatedboundarytempos seem a basic condition gov"Proportionally
...
erning accelerandos/ritards these elements set the temporal framemust be shaped(418, emphasis
work within which an accelerando/ritard
added [by Rothstein])."
Rothstein's added emphases promote an impression of rigidity.The
normativereading,providedby my plain text, is the intendedone. Had I
wanted anythingelse, I would have addeditalics.
Item. The impression of "rigid adherence"is furtheredby the reviewer'somissions-by thenumerous
passagesaboutproportional
tempo,
that is, which Rothstein chooses not to quote. I offer a sampling, with
which I conclude this analysis, as these passages may be seen as representativeof the truetone and context of my views:
1) Concludingan analyticdiscussion of tempoin Beethoven,I say: "It
may be impossible to drawultimateconclusions aboutspecific temposin
the Ninth. Traditionhas defined one set that, rightly or otherwise, devi187

ates in partfromthose of the composer.We aretold by contemporary
witnesses that faster tempos prevailedin Beethoven's time than in our own
era.A dedicatedcontingentof modem performers
successfullyre-creates
the music as it may have soundedin its earlydays (thoughthatre-creation
snags to an extent on the thornyquestion of tempo). A slippery terrain
prevails regardingtempo, in which no base-historical fact, score ediold
detions, personaltaste, tradition,instruments andnew, performance
mands,acoustics, andmany otherfactors-presents perspectivesthatare
not, in some way, irreconcilable.
"The one factor that emerges as a constant in this musical bouillabaisse is proportionaltempo. Clearly it affected the way Beethoven
perceivedtempo. Just as clearly,it arose from deeply embeddedfeatures
of structure
withinBeethoven'smusic, addingtherebya temporaldimension of coherenceto worksthatin many otherparameters extensively
are
unified.
"Manyconditions will affect actual tempos in a given performance.
Ultimately,pacingwill restuponpersonalintuition,in some ways affected
by mattersbeyond even the controlof musicians. (Acoustics is a case in
point.) Ultimately,too, we will findtempossatisfyingor not uponequally
intuitive grounds.That we may find them coherent,however-binding
and unifying-seems a desideratumthat stems from functional aspects
of our nervous system as it guides our perceptions,intuitions,feelings"
(Epstein,239-40).
2) Another sample is the passage following the third Epstein "core
belief" offered by Rothsteinon p. 127. Thus [Epstein, 155]: "Weare not
machines,however.We can and do departfrom an overridinggoverning
pulse in the course of performance.How and where we do so is critical.
Flexibilityalongthelines of themagneteffect [discussedin Epstein,chapter 6, p. 152]-forward movement, ritard,rubato, and the like-adds
excitementto performance.
These alterationsseem to be controlled,howa higher order of time organization,their phase relations coever, by
ordinatedon longer spans."
3) I continue,in an endnote affiliatedwith this last passage: "Wecan
of
also overridea governingpulse, to the detriment the music, if ourmusical focus centersupon elementsnot germaneto pulse or to a global view
of a work. It is not uncommonto hearmusicianslinger over a phrase,or
exaggeratea ritardor othertemporalnuancefor the sake of local expression. This can enrichthe music if kept within bounds,with a largertemwhenoverporaldesignin mind.It can destroytemporal
planandstructure
done. It would seem to be a matterof degree and, as mentionalabove, of
focus-where, thatis, one centersone's musicalthoughts"
(Epstein,518).

188

*

*

*

This review raises the workloadfor interestedreaders.It will not do to
readthe book andthe review,in whateverorder,andleave it at that.Given
this letter,readerswill now have to shuttlebetween book, Rothsteinreview, Epstein response, and the various permutationseffected by these
comparisonsin orderto to figureout where validity may lie.
Ultimately this is to the good. The review has broughtto center stage
the issue of tempo, which until now has not been at the forefrontof theoretical interest. I shall read with interest any response that Rothstein
his
may offer to this letter-in particular, responseto the specific matters
in his review thatI have raisedhere.
David Epstein
MassachusettsInstituteof Technology
NOTES
1. Half=80is specifiedas the governing
themeat m. 92, its
tempofor the "Freude"
firstoccuTence.Thoughnot specifiedas suchwhenthe themerecursat m. 237, I
as
(andmanyothers)see the connection implicit.
2. RobertMorgan's
recentarticleprovidessignificant
insightsinto this question,as
do the ideas of MauriceMerleau-Ponty,
whichMorganprovides(pp. 2-4). Parwith
ticularlyrelevantis the discussionof the evolutionof ideas, as contrasted
of
Thomaskuhn'sperspective paradigm
shifts.See Morgan,
Robert."Symmetrical FormandCommon-Practice
Music TheorySpectrum
20/1 (Spring
Tonality,"
1998):1-47.
3. Weber's
Fraction
derived
fromit, also knownas the JustNoLaw,andtheWeber
ticeableDifference[JND],describethe minimaldegreeof changefroman established periodicity
requisitefor thatchangeto be perceived.This is discussedin
detailon pp. 166-67 (chapter of the book,whichis concerned
with criteria
for
7)
studiesof tempoin followingchapters. I havenoted,the chapter ignoredby
As
is
Rothstein.
7
4. The GettyandMachstudiesaredetailedin chapter (167, andtheextensiven.10,
521-23). Gettyfoundthatthe JNDrisesto 13-17%at 3.5 sec., theupperlimitin
his tests;Machfound 18%at 2.5 sec. and33%at 15 sec. Creelman
(1962) found
the JNDto lie morein the areaof 10%withinwhatis essentiallythe psychologiin
cal present-from 0.2 sec-2.0 sec. (Detailsandcitationsareprovided the text
andbibliography ShapingTime.)
None of this is discussedby Rothstein.
of
5. All butone of these (phrase12) arewithinthe alloweddiscrepancy fit.
of
of
the
6.I shouldnote that,frommy presentperspective, appearance a groundbeat
at the headof a phrasemay be a norm,butis by no meansa universal an allnor
Thereare no rulesaboutthis matter.
Rubatodecisionsreflect
pervasivedemand.
and
elements.
ways thatan artistviews a structure choosesto shapeits expressive
7. The Schunann Piano Quintetstraddlesboth categories.It aboundsin Grund-

189

but
gestaltrelationships, alsobringsbacktheopeningthemeof thefirstmovement
at the coda of the last movement.
Likewise,Beethoven's 131 StringQuartet,
op.
as has been widely observed,
to
emanates greatdegreefroma Basic Shape-the
fouropeningnotesof thefugue(movement Yetit comesclose to a variedstateI).
mentof thisopeningthemein thelastmovement 21ff andthereafter).
Thusthe
(m.
of
laterthemehas something the "recall"
character
notedabove.TheMozart
symthan
categories.
phoniesfit morethe Grundgestalt the "recall"
8. Theissuein thishypothetical
exerciseis musicalcontent, practical
not
issues such
as whether transposed
the
music"fitsunderthe hands."
9. Zaslaw(1989),whohasdevoted
muchof his career thesevexingquestions,
to
parin
allels manyof my thoughts this letterandin ShapingTime.See his discussion
of performance
and
practice tempo,489-501.
in
10. Of the eight barsdelineated the firstmovement
phrase,only the firstfour are
includedin the musicalexample.

WORKS CII ED
in
Evidence
Drake,C., andBotte,M.C. 1993."Tempo
sensitivity auditory
sequences:
for a Multiple-look
Model."
and
54:
Perception Psychophysics 277-86.
and
Jones,M.R., andBoltz, M. 1989. "Dynamic
PsyAttending Responseto Time."
chologicalReview96: 459-91.
HowPeopleTrack
Large,E.W.,andJones,M.R. 1999."TheDynamicsof Attending:
Events."
Review,106: 119-59.
Psychological
Time-varying
fromTemporal
McAuley,J.D., andKidd,G.R. 1998. "Effectof Deviations
Expectaof
HumanPerceptionson TempoDiscrimination Isochronous
ToneSequences."
tionand Performance
24(6): 1-15.
in
and
and
Tass,P.A.1999.PhaseResetting Medicine Biology.Heidelberg NewYork:
Verlag.
Springer
Practice,Reception.
Performance
Context,
Zaslaw,N. 1989. Mozart'sSymphonies:
New York:
Oxford.

190

