VISUALIZING MUSIC ON THE METRICAL CIRCLE
Klaus Frieler
University of Hamburg
Institute for Musicology
ABSTRACT
In this paper we propose a novel method, called Metrical
Circle Map, for exploring the cyclic aspects of musical
time. To this end, we give a short formalization introducing the notion of Metrical Markov Chains as transition probabilities of segments on the metrical circle. As
an illustration we present a compact visualization of the
zeroth- and ﬁrst order metrical Markov transitions of 61
Irish folk songs.
1 INTRODUCTION
One important and distinctive feature of metrically-bound
music is the double nature of its musical time, linear on
one hand, cyclic on the other. However, in most of musicological and other music-related research the focus is
laid on linear aspects of musical time. The cyclic nature of
musical time is mainly investigated in the context of genuine meter and rhythm research, where rhythm and meters
are occasionally visualized or operationalized using a circle representation ([3], [4], [5]). In this paper, we will
extend this approach by introducing the so-called Metrical Circle Map and Metrical Markov Chains, opening up
several interesting posibilities of visualizing and analyzing metrically bound music, including single monophonic
or polyphonic pieces as well as entire corpora.

Figure 1. Metrical circle map of two Irish melodies. The
left one (Essen Folksong Collection, I0501) shows 2/4
time, the right one (Essen Folksong Collection, I0504) 3/4
time. Thickness of lines corresponds to the frequencies
of the transitions. Time is running counter-clockwise and
the downbeat is located an the point (1,0) in the complex
plane (three o’clock)
In this form we already normalized the map, so that time is
running in the mathematical direction counter-clockwise
and the beginning of bars always lie at three o’clock. In
Figure 1 two simple examples of the Metrical Circle Map
(MCM) for two Irish folk songs can be seen, one of them
being in 2/4 and one in 3/4 time.
2.1 Metrical Markov Chains

2 METRICAL CIRCLE MAP
The onsets of metrically-bound music are organized around
underlying beats (or pulses), which are grouped into higher
level units. This is even true for un-quantized music with
tempo and meter variations, as for the concept of meter
only a set of discrete time-points is needed along with a
grouping prescription. We restrict ourselves here to the
bar as the main metrical unit, and futhermore to the simplest form of a bar as a constantly-recurring time-span.
For a rhythm conceived as a sequence of time-points ti ,
and a bar time T - possibly inferred from the original sequence by some beat and meter induction algorithm (e.g.
[2]), or given by annotation - the Metrical Circle Map MT
is deﬁned as a mapping from the reals into the complex
unit circle S 1 :
ti

MT (ti ) = zi = e2πi T

c 2007 Austrian Computer Society (OCG).

(1)

The Metrical Circle Map (MCM) lends itself quite naturally to deﬁning transition probabilities between segments
on the metrical circle. To this end, we deﬁne N intervals
on S 1 according to
φk
1
1
Ik = {z ∈ S 1 |z = e2πi N , φk ∈ [k − , k + ]}
2
2

(2)

with 0 ≤ k < N . With these intervals and the MCM
we can map a sequence of time-points onto a sequence
of intervals on the metrical circle. For these sequences
of interval indices we deﬁne the usual Markov transitions
probabilities. Particularly, we will be interested in zerothand ﬁrst-order transitions
p(k) = p(z ∈ Ik ),

p(k|j) = p(zi ∈ Ik |zi−1 ∈ Ij )
(3)
For calculating transition probabilities, the choice of N is
of course crucial, as it controls the time resolution. If, for
example, one chooses N = 2, the ﬁrst order probabilities
indicate the probabilities of transitions between the two

Signature
Count

2/4
7

3/4
20

4/4
20

6/4
2

6/8
10

9/8
2

12
15

9

18

6

Table 1. Distribution of signatures in the collection of 61
Irish folk songs
21

halves of a bar. For more detailed and complete comparisions, particularly for whole corpora with a full range of
meters, a choice of N = 48 seems appropriate, representing e.g. a 4/4 meter with a resolution of thirty-second note
sextuplets.

3

0

24

27

3 EXAMPLES: ZEROTH- AND FIRST-ORDER
MARKOV CHAINS FOR IRISH FOLK SONGS
In order to illustrate our method, we transformed 61 (monophonic) Irish folk songs taken from the Essen Folksong
Database with the MCM, and accumulated zeroth- and
ﬁrst-order transition probabilities over all songs, using an
N = 48 segmentation of the circle. These probabilities are jointly depicted in Figure 2, where the thickness
of a line connecting two metric positions is proportional
to the ﬁrst-order transition probability (transitions with
p < 0.001 left out). The size of the smaller circles at the
metric positions are proportional to the logarithm of occupation probability. One clearly identiﬁes the square from
duple, the triangle from triple, and the hexagon from compound duple meters. Not surprisingly, the downbeat is the
most frequent position (21%), with the most arrows ending at this point, reached from 6 different positions, noticably from points right before the downbeat, the upbeats,
which play an important role in establishing and reinforcing the meter. The next most frequent position, the halfbar position from duple and ternary compound meter, is
occupied in 13% of the cases, with 3 arrows ending there.
Furthermore, a nearly complete absence of syncopations
can be read off from the graph, notably, the vertical axis
from the transition 12 → 36 is missing, as well as syncopational transitions from positions 6, 18, 30, 42 in duple
meter, or from 8, 20, 40 in compound duple and triple meter. In contrast to this, examination of a set of pop songs
showed a considerably more chaotic picture (not shown
here for the lack of space), with frequent syncopations, a
higher diversity of possible transitions and less emphasis
on the down- and half-bar-beats.

4 DISCUSSION & OUTLOOK
We propose the method of the Metrical Circle Map. Single or entire corpora of melodies, as well as polyphonic
music can be visualized on the metrical circle using metrical transition probabilities, giving new analytical insight
in the cyclic aspects of musical time and in the metrical
peculiarities of different genres, which will be explored
further in the future.

45

42

30

33

39
36

Figure 2. Zeroth- and ﬁrst-order metric transitions probabilities of 61 Irish folk songs from the Essen collection.
The thickness of lines is proportional to the frequency of
ﬁrst-order transitions; transitions with p < 0.01 were left
out. The size of the circles is proportional to the logarithm
of occupation probabilities.
5 ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
We like to thank Stephan Roters (http://www.brandhotel.de)
for his help with assembling Figure 2.
6 REFERENCES
[1] Anku, Willie. “Circles and Time:
A Theory of Structural Organization of Ryhthm in
African Music”, Music Theory Online, 6(1),
http://www.societymusictheory.org/mto, 2004.
[2] Frieler, Klaus. “Beat and meter extraction using gaussiﬁed onsets.” In Proc. 5th International Conference
on Music Information Retrieval, Universitat Pompeu
Fabra, Barcelona, Spain, 2004.
[3] London, Justin Hearing in Time. Oxford University
Press, Oxford, England, 2004.
[4] Toussaint, Godfried T. “A comparison of rhythmic
similarity measures.” In Proc. 5th International Conference on Music Information Retrieval, Universitat
Pompeu Fabra, Barcelona, Spain, 2004.
[5] Taslakian, P. and Toussaint, Godfried T. “Geometric properties of musical rhythm”, Proceedings of the
16th Fall Workshop on Computational and Combinatorial Geometry, Smith College, Northampton, Massachussetts, November 10-11, 2006.

