PERSPECTIVES
components to specific surface sites. The concurrent or subsequent recruitment of actomyosin and other factors to these sites defines
the trailing edge of the cell and thus the direction of migration.
This admirably integrated view of both
cell surface and actomyosin polarization
raises important questions. For instance, it’s
not clear how polarization of the membrane
and cytoplasm are coupled, or how different
proteins are targeted to the same sites. Also,
how does Wnt5a signaling interface with the
graded chemokine to ensure that polarization occurs at cell surfaces distal to the
chemokine source? Intriguingly, Witze et al.
observed that some responding melanoma
cells polarized in the opposite (proximal)
direction. Both distal and proximal polarizations require Wnt5a, with a preponderance
of distal events promoting migration toward
the chemokine source. Thus, the chemokine
and Wnt5a are more tightly coupled to the
same axis than they are to the same direction
along that axis.
It is interesting to compare Wnt5a to other
noncanonical Wnt signals that polarize single
cells. One common theme is a requirement for
actin. Actin microfilaments and myosin are
required for planar cell polarity in Drosophila
(3), and microfilaments are required in fourcell-stage C. elegans embryos for the Wntmediated induction of an asymmetric cell division that segregates endoderm from mesoderm (6). However, planar cell polarity
acts through RhoA (8), whereas Wnt5a acts
through RhoB. Furthermore, the C. elegans

Wnt signal that segregates endoderm from
mesoderm acts instructively and requires a
permissive signal (a tyrosine kinase) (12), in
contrast to the permissive action of Wnt5a in
the presence of an instructive chemokine signal. Once again, noncanonical Wnt pathways
present a bewildering mix of similarities and
differences. Appropriately, the Wnt field is
evolving toward the use of individual pathway
names based on key molecules and properties,
and away from the historical distinction
between canonical and noncanonical. Presumably, as we learn to speak more clearly
about different Wnt pathways, we also will
come to better understand their different
molecular mechanisms of action.
References and Notes
1. C. Y. Logan, R. Nusse, Annu. Rev. Cell Dev. Biol. 20, 781
(2004).
2. E. S. Witze, E. S. Litman, G. M. Argast, R. T. Moon, N. G. Ahn,
Science 320, 365 (2008).
3. M. T. Veeman, J. D. Axelrod, R. T. Moon, Dev. Cell 5, 367
(2003).
4. P. N. Adler, Dev. Cell 2, 525 (2002).
5. F. D. Park, J. R. Tenlen, J. R. Priess, Curr. Biol. 14, 2252
(2004).
6. C. J. Thorpe, A. Schlesinger, B. Bowerman, Trends Cell Biol.
10, 10 (2000).
7. M. A. Herman, M. Wu, Front. Biosci. 9, 1530 (2004).
8. K. Mizumoto, H. Sawa, Trends Cell Biol. 17, 465 (2007).
9. T. Kaletta, H. Schnabel, R. Schnabel, Nature 390, 294
(1997).
10. A. T. Weeraratna et al., Cancer Cell 1, 279 (2002).
11. K. Satyamoorthy, J. Muyrers, F. Meier, D. Patel, M. Herlyn,
Oncogene 20, 4676 (2001).
12. B. Goldstein, H. Takeshita, K. Mizumoto, H. Sawa, Dev. Cell
10, 391 (2006).
13. Work in the author’s laboratory is funded by grants from NIH.
10.1126/science.1157590

MUSIC THEORY

Musical operations, such as transpositions,
can be expressed as symmetries of n-dimensional space.

Geometrical Music Theory
Rachel Wells Hall

usic theorists normally use discrete
mathematics, such as set and finite
group theory, to describe musical
relations; they also invoke geometry in modeling musical objects such as chords, rhythms,
and scales. However, no unified geometric
perspective has hitherto emerged. On page
346 of this issue, Callender et al. (1) demonstrate that many musical terms can be understood as expressing symmetries of n-dimensional space, where each dimension represents a voice in the score. Identifying—gluing
together—points related by these symmetries

M

Department of Mathematics and Computer Science, Saint
Joseph’s University, Philadelphia, PA 19131, USA. E-mail:
rhall@sju.edu

328

produces exotic mathematical spaces (orbifolds) that subsume a large number of geometric models previously proposed.
The use of mathematics to describe, analyze, and create music goes back millennia.
Mathematical questions have previously
emerged in music theory that are appealing,
nontrivial, and, in several cases, connected
to other scientific fields, such as physics,
dynamical systems, and crystallography (2–4).
Math inspired composers such as Schoenberg,
Messaien, and Xenakis; musical investigations have even motivated mathematical discoveries (5).
However, the geometrical music theory
proposed by Callender et al. stands out
both for the breadth of its musical implica-

18 APRIL 2008

VOL 320

SCIENCE

Published by AAAS

tions and the depth of its mathematical content. It suggests a wealth of new techniques
for studying music theoretical topics,
including chord similarity and melodic
contour, and provides attractive visualizations of harmonic relationships. Although
the authors’ use of contemporary geometry
departs from the discrete mathematics normally used to describe music, they make a
convincing argument for the validity of
their models.
Although most musicians are not mathematicians, both groups think in degrees of
abstraction. Music theorists invoke the mathematical concept of equivalence class—a set of
objects that are “the same” if we ignore certain
information—to describe these musical struc-

www.sciencemag.org

Downloaded from www.sciencemag.org on August 28, 2009

receptor, and cytoskeletal components (actin
microfilaments and a nonmuscle myosin,
together called actomyosin). In response to
Wnt5a, all of these proteins become polarized
in overlapping bands within the trailing edge
of migrating cells (see the figure). Polarized
bands of ac-tomyosin contract to lift the trailing edge and, together with cell process
extensions at the leading edge, promote
migration toward a chemokine source.
Multiple pulses of these transient polarizations occur within single cells over time.
In exploring the signaling pathway that
mediates this Wnt5a response, Witze et al. discovered that actin microfilaments and the cell
adhesion protein depend on each other for
polarized localization and that both are
required for myosin polarization. Like some
other noncanonical Wnt pathways, the cytosolic proteins Dishevelled and Protein Kinase
C are required. But in contrast to noncanonical pathways that influence actin through the
small guanosine triphosphatase (GTPase)
RhoA, Wnt5a acts through RhoB, which controls the movement of intracellular vesicles
called endosomes. Furthermore, the authors
observed an enrichment of multivesicular bodies at the polarized cell edge, and polarization
required both the GTPase Rab4 (known to regulate multivesicular body formation) and
dynamin (known to control the formation of
endosomes at the cell surface). Witze et al. also
found that polarization of the cell adhesion
protein occurs by its transit through the Golgi.
The authors conclude that Wnt5a polarizes
cells by promoting the recycling of membrane

PERSPECTIVES
C5,C5

depends on the amount of
vocal movement between
states. Composers typically
C5,F 4
try to minimize this moveC5,C4
ment—a problem equivalent
to finding the shortest path
C4,C4
between two points.
Although the design of
Music in space. Musical orbifolds:
efficient voice leadings is cen(top) ordered pairs of pitches
tral to traditional composi(unisons lie on the diagonal x = y,
tional practice, the systematic
C,C
and tritones on parallel diagonals),
study of voice leading is com(middle) ordered pairs of pitch
F ,C
paratively recent (7–10). Geoclasses, and (bottom) sets of pitch
metrical music theory essenclasses with no more than two eleF ,F
tially represents a voice leadments. [Single notes form a trefoil
ing by a vector that connects a
knot that is the boundary of a
source chord to a target chord.
thrice-twisted Möbius strip; triThe authors show the musical
tones lie on the core circle (11).]
distinction between individual
and uniform applications of
F
symmetries corresponds to
B
the geometrical notion of a
bundle, which allows them to
D ,A
G ,D
define analogs of voice leadF
ings between abstract musical
C
objects such as major chords
and minor chords.
Geometrical music theory
E,B
G,C
suggests new directions for
C#
E
research in traditional music
G
theoretical topics, such as
chord and voice leading simiA
larity, and new tools for teachG
ing and conceptualizing music,
and will perhaps inspire comF,B
F ,C
posers. Moreover, one can
envision practical applications
D
of geometrical music theory,
D
such as in the design of music
visualization tools, interactive
musical toys, or even new
topologically complex; they may be non- musical instruments.
Euclidean, meaning that there may be more
References
than one line connecting two points (see the
1. C. Callendar, I. Quinn, D. Tymoczko, Science 320, 346
(2008).
figure). These features have musical ramifi2. J. Clarke, R. Voss, Nature 258, 317 (1975).
cations. Callender et al. provide a compre3. J. Douthett, R. Krantz, J. Math. Phys. 37, 7 3334
hensive catalog of their geometrical spaces
(1996).
in table S2 (1).
4. G. Toussaint, in Discrete and Computational Geometry
Japanese Conference, JCDCG 2004, Tokyo, Japan, 8 to 11
Distance and movement within these
October 2004, Revised Selected Papers Proceedings of
spaces have natural meanings. A musical score
the Japan Conference on Discrete and Computational
represents pitch vertically and time horizonGeometry (Springer, Berlin, 2005).
tally. Each vertical harmonic state (the notes
5. D. Knuth, The Art of Computer Programming, vol. 4,
played at one time) corresponds to a pitch
fascile 4, Generating All Trees: History of Combinatorial
Generation (Addison-Wesley, Upper Saddle River, NJ,
sequence, ordered by instrumental voice; a
2006).
score for n voices becomes a succession of
6. D. Tymoczko, Science 313, 72 (2006).
points in n-dimensional space, where each
7. J. Roeder, thesis, Yale University (1984).
coordinate tracks the melody sounded by an
8. R. Morris, Mus. Theory Spectrum 20, 2 175 (1998).
9. J. Straus, Mus. Theory Spectrum 25, 2 305 (2003).
individual voice. Voice leadings—mappings
between adjacent chords in a score—corre- 10. R. Cohn, Mus. Theory Online 9, 4 (2003).
11. C. Tuffley, Algebr. Geom. Topol. 2, 1119 (2002).
spond to directed line segments connecting
harmonic states. The size of a voice leading
10.1126/science.1155463

www.sciencemag.org

F 4,C5

SCIENCE

VOL 320

Published by AAAS

18 APRIL 2008

Downloaded from www.sciencemag.org on August 28, 2009

tures. For example, middle C is
a particular pitch (frequency
measured on a logarithmic
C4,C5
scale), and the letter name (or
pitch class) “C” refers to any
pitch that is a whole number of
octaves away from it. Any collection of C, E, and G notes is a
C major chord.
Callender et al. (1) show
that many musical terms
describe equivalence classes
under combinations of five
basic OPTIC relations: octave
shifts, permutation (reordering), transposition (the relation
between pitches sharing the
same succession of intervals,
C,F
regardless of their starting
note), inversion (turning a sequence upside down), and cardinality equivalence (ignoring
repetitions). The authors go
beyond traditional music theory by showing that there are
two distinct ways in which
these symmetries can apply to
chord progressions: uniformly,
B
where the same symmetry applies to each chord, and individually, where distinct symmetry operations apply to the
harmonies in a progression.
This distinction allows Callender et al. to formalize the
relations among a large number of musical terms as in table
S1 of their paper (1).
Following Tymoczko’s previous work (6), they develop
geometrical models of these
relations. Pitches correspond to real numbers; each point in Euclidean n-dimensional
space (that is, a space with no underlying
curvature) represents a sequence of n
pitches. Points near each other differ by
microtones (for example, a C major chord
played out of tune lies near an in-tune version) and are in this sense similar.
With the exception of cardinality equivalence, each of the OPTIC relations corresponds to a symmetry group. For example,
permuting the first two entries in a sequence
is equivalent to reflection in a plane of n – 1
dimensions (a hyperplane), and transposing
a sequence is equivalent to a translation.
Gluing together points in n-dimensional
space on the basis of their memberships in
equivalence classes creates families of quotient spaces, or orbifolds. Many of these
mathematical spaces are geometrically and

329

