Yale University Department of Music

The Recognition of Major and Minor Keys in German Theory: 1680-1730
Author(s): Joel Lester
Source: Journal of Music Theory, Vol. 22, No. 1 (Spring, 1978), pp. 65-103
Published by: Duke University Press on behalf of the Yale University Department of Music
Stable URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/843628
Accessed: 15/12/2009 13:45
Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of JSTOR's Terms and Conditions of Use, available at
http://www.jstor.org/page/info/about/policies/terms.jsp. JSTOR's Terms and Conditions of Use provides, in part, that unless
you have obtained prior permission, you may not download an entire issue of a journal or multiple copies of articles, and you
may use content in the JSTOR archive only for your personal, non-commercial use.
Please contact the publisher regarding any further use of this work. Publisher contact information may be obtained at
http://www.jstor.org/action/showPublisher?publisherCode=duke.
Each copy of any part of a JSTOR transmission must contain the same copyright notice that appears on the screen or printed
page of such transmission.
JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide range of
content in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and facilitate new forms
of scholarship. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.

Duke University Press and Yale University Department of Music are collaborating with JSTOR to digitize,
preserve and extend access to Journal of Music Theory.

http://www.jstor.org

THE RECOGNITION
OF
MAJORAND MINOR KEYS
IN GERMAN THEORY:1680-1730

Joel Lester

German theory on modes and keys during the 17th and
early 18th centuries is rife with paradox. It was a German
theorist who first presented a comprehensive theory of majorminor polarity and who differentiated two types of mode
almost exclusively according to the quality of "tonic" triad
(Johann Lippius, in works from 1610 to 12). Yet his German
contemporaries and several generations of succeeding German
theorists persisted in maintaining the traditional modal
theories as the basis of contemporary music during their
gradual but total demise in several other countries. Second,
several theorists writing in German who did begin to recognize keys as opposed to modes around the turn of the 18th
century related those keys to foreign practices (Antoni Berthali to French practice,1 and Johann Mattheson to Italian2).
Yet the earliest presentation of 24 keys as equally original
(not with some keys considered transpositions of other more
original ones) and the earliest recognition of the circle of
fifths appeared in German theory. And finally, despite these
"firsts" in German theory, it is only in Germany that a major
65

polemical battle erupted after 1715 debating the viability of
major-minorkeys as applied to contemporary music.
An earlier study has outlined the revolutionary breakthroughs in German theory around 1600, and the persistence
of a conservative modal tradition in Germany throughout the
17th century.3 The present article continues this historical
survey, covering developments leading up to and immediately
following the recognition of 24 keys in Germany.
Germantheorists at the end of the 17th century approached
the major and minor keys from two distinctly different directions. Some discussed the traditional modes and their gradual
evolution into major and minor keys, continuing a trend
begun so tentatively by Zarlino in 1558. Others merely listed
the keys in use by their tonic triads, sometimes without explicitly mentioning the major-minordifferentiation, in a tradition deriving from many sources, both German and foreign.
Andreas Werckmeister (1645-1706) is without doubt the
most important theorist in the first group. His theories on
mode are presented in six treatises, published between 1687
and 1707. Since most of his views did not change substantially
over this 20-year period, these six works will be discussed
together:
Musicae mathematicae... (Frankfurt and Leipzig, 1687),
on the derivation of rules of composition from calculations and the monochord.
Hypomnemata musica... (Quedlinburg, 1697), "musical
notebook... in particular on composition and temperament."
Erweiterte und verbesserte Orgel-Probe... (Quedlinburg,
1698). Referred to hereafter as Orgel-Probe.
Die nothwendigsten Anmerckungen und Regeln wie der
Bassus Continuus oder General-Basswol konne tractiret
werden . . . (Aschersleben,

[1698]4).

Referred to here-

after as General-Bass.
Harmonologia musica ...

(Frankfurt and Leipzig, 1702),

"or brief introduction to musical composition."
Musicalische Paradoxal-Discourse... (Quedlinburg, 1707),
66

"or uncommon presentation on how Music has a high
and holy origin, and how to the contrary it is so misused."5
As a traditionalist and a church musician, Werckmeister
saw much of value in modal theory. And even though he
recognized that only two (or possibly four) modes were still
in contemporary use, he argued that only a solid foundation
in modal theory allowed one truly to understand the use of
the new keys.
We only want to discuss here something of the twelve
modes, because our chorales, and, still from time to time,
other musical pieces are based on them. Nowadays one
could make do well with two modes; but because of the
chorales we will discuss the twelve modes a little. For one
so often hears some organists who do not know the least of
this subject debase themselves: for example, when they
prelude to the German Hr. Gott dich loben wir (which was
considered and sung by the ancients as a humble prayer),
they take the transposed Aeolian in the range of e f-sharp
g a b c d e; yet it is regularHypophrygian. Also, to Erbarm
dich mein 0 Herre Gott, the same. When they would play
Ach Herr mich armen Sunder, they make a prelude in C
and take the Ionian mode for the Phrygian, yet these two
modes are quite different....6
Thus only a few of today's musicians understand the
above-mentioned modes, and many fewer know how to use
them. What will we do? Will we discard them or the diatonic scale from which they have their origin? Not at all,
for the foundation must remain ....

For if a fully experi-

enced composer hits upon a foreign cadence by degrees
now and then, an inexperienced one does not know that it
is done by degrees, and cites this as a precedent that the
modes are no longer in use, claiming that the most eminent
composers have seen the modes decline, and therefore proceed from one cadence to another, now major, now minor,
now diatonic, now chromatic, and so forth....7
Although similar sentiments are expressed in all his works,
he is less insistent on knowledge of the modes in later trea67

tises. As a practical musician, in fact, Werckmeisterrecognized
the existence of only two principal modes:
Today's music is entirely different (as noted above), and
only some four modes are in use: Ionian mixed with Mixolydian and Dorian mixed with Aeolian, mostly in the range
of the fourth.8 Thus no more than two modes can now be
established. And that is not so unnatural if we use them
with the proper order. If we take Lydian, on account of
the tritone orfalsette there is such an unnatural progression
in it that even the ancients themselves never or hardly ever
used it. Who uses Phrygian in today's music? Nobody. Who
Mixolydian? Hardly any. Therefore on behalf of a better
order according to today's style of composition, we want
to maintain only two modes. But because these can take
their names neither from the Dorians, the Ionians, nor from
any other nations (because they did not have our present
style of music), therefore we want to name them according
to their nature and character, so that they can be differentiated. The first can be named the natural mode, because
it always maintains the major third in the beginning over
the fundamental note, according to the natural order of
the proportional numbers 4, 5, 6, 8 as in the notes c e g c
or d f-sharp a d, etc. The second can be named the less
natural mode, because the root numbers in its natural progression are further from perfection, and therefore do not
establish such a happy harmony as the preceding. The
natural progression of this mode is 10, 12, 15, 20, which is
further from unity than the first.... We can also name one
mode perfect, and the other less perfect. Some performers
name them dur and moll; e.g., CEG is C dur, CE-flatG is C
moll, DF-sharpA is D dur, DFA is D moll. We are not happy
with these names, because the word dur does not correspond with the harmony; for when something is sad, one
says "that is entirely dur," yet this triad is more joyful and
perfect than anything else. Nevertheless, because these
terms are now used so commonly, they will probably persist.9
In his earlier works, he accepts Dorian as the model for the
68

minor mode. Only in his Paradoxal-Discourse, published posthumously in 1707, is Aeolian cited as the model.10
Werckmeister recognized all 12 possible transpositions, discussed harmonic progressions around the circle of fifths, and
argued for an approximation of equal temperament to allow
the use of these harmonies on the keyboard. But it is not clear
whether he recognized 24 major and minor keys. The Musicae
mathematicae discusses transposition only with the 12 modes.
If each mode is transposed to all 12 pitches, and there are 12
modes, then theoretically 144 forms arise. But he rejects a
fuller discussion of this point as unnecessary.11After the reduction of the number of modes to two, he does not again discuss transposition. Similar situations exist in his Musicalische
Temperatur(Frankfurt and Leipzig, 1691) and Harmonologia
(1702). In the introduction to the former, tempered intonation is considered necessary "because nowadays people want
to play all songs on all the keys." In the latter, Werckmeister
states that the organist who does not know how to transpose
to any of the twelve notes does not know the keyboard well
enough.'2 But in neither work does he specify whether he is
talking about 24 keys or 144 modal transpositions.
Similarly, his discussion of the "musical circle" in other
treatises refers to circular harmonic progressions, not directly
to modes or keys. Thus, in both the Hypomnemata musica
(1697) and the Orgel-Probe(1698), the musical circle is mentioned as one argument for equal temperament, but is not
described.'3 In the General-Bass(1698) the sequence of triads
is presented both ascending and descending. Major and minor
triads alternate in each direction: C e G b D, etc.; and C a F d
B-flat, etc.'4 The same example recurs in the Paradoxal-Discourse (1707) along with the harmonic progression of a major
triad around the circle of fifths through both the sharp and
flat keys (Example 1).15
Werckmeister also argues for modern key signatures, complaining about those who set incorrect signatures to transposed compositions. Thus, in Ionian on A, F-sharp, C-sharp,
and G-sharp should all be in the signature. Those who write
only C-sharp or G-sharp are writing in no mode ("nullius
modi").16
69

:

~

---c

e

G

g,

- I
-on

?

H

d,

d

H

s0? C dis
Gi ?o #?

Gis c

dis

idi

{
?
Ito~ ?.i
Ib(70
f

A

F,

gis

f

cis,

6'

o
I1

I

&11

6'

J

bo
e
e

s bb
cis
A,

Fis

fis,

cis

Io

d

A

a,

I.,

B

cis

cis,

lfo

d

,

_o

I ..

ti., D"

bt"

dis, dis

c

fis

"

h,

?

?

o o
I

%1

gis

e

o

I

--

I
e,

cis

vI
f

gis,

c

c11

f

f,

a

c

"
i?o |b" I b

b'
?.

b

dis

c

B,

Fis,

fis

dis,

''b

bo bo
B

g

d,

fis

I

1

db
d

dis

c

H

Gis

G,

g

E,

I
boe
e

MlliJ.

Ascendendo

{t

durch

bI8 Ib 11
8
'

die # in der harmon.

?

b8

b8

l

etc

\

..

?

b6
r

bo

Descendendo durCh die b.

Example 1.
70

ia"

J

Gis,

| c
H,

IH u G
H

b^'

c.

II

In summary, Werckmeister comes across in these treatises
as a thoughtful, practical theorist, ready to accommodate himself to contemporary practice, and even to advocate new
teachings, but also recognizing the problems in the newer
theories and desiring to retain those aspects of the modes
which are still valuable. This moderate stance is in sharp contrast to writers in the 1710's and later, when sharp polemic
barbs flew between the defenders of antiquity and the proponents of the new keys, leaving little room for one who
wished the best of both. Werckmeister received some harsh
criticism from Heinichen, for example, who argued that all
facets of composition could be adequately treated under the
major and minor keys, and there was no cause to retain the
modes. Perhapswhat is most remarkableabout Werckmeister's
position is that he was a church organist. In the next decades,
church musicians were to be among the most outspoken
opponents of the 24 keys.
The second tradition leading towards the recognition of 24
keys involved a listing of the final triads to identify modes or
keys. The origins of this tradition can be traced back to Zarlino, who had cited the final, fifth, and third of the modes as
the principal cadence points. Johann Lippius, who recognized
in these notes the fundamental nature of the "trias harmonica" both as a harmony and as the foundation of modal
theory, listed modes by their "tonic" triads. This method of
citing modes was used even by theorists of the 17th century
who did not recognize the triad as a harmonic unit and who
did not recognize any major-minordifferentiation of modes.17
Joining this tradition at the end of the 17th century was
another, whose roots go back to Italian theory and practice
around the turn of the 17th century. The common usages of
modal transposition of the psalm tones were codified for the
first time in theory by Adriano Banchieri (1567-1634) as the
"eight tones of ecclesiastical plain chant":'8
Tone Number
Final Pitch
Signature
1
2
3
4

D
G
A
E

none
one flat
none
none
71

Tone Number
Final Pitch
Signature
C
5
none
6
F
one flat
7
D
one flat
8
G
none
This organization of tones will be referred to here as the
"church keys." 9 The fourth register of the same work contains compositions on the Magnificat in these eight tones. But
tones 3 and 8 are one step lower with a flat in the signature
and contain the comment, "One note lower to accommodate
the chorus."
Banchieri's Cartella musicale (third edition, Venice, 161314) lists the eight traditional modes on pp. 68-71, but then
sets duos to the church keys. On page 73, introducing the duo
of the second "ecclesiastical tone," he notes: "The second
tone is plagal as we have said, contrary to the first authentic;
it has as its limits the octave from the note g to g .... [!]"
When he reaches the seventh mode, Banchieri describes the
difference between it and the first:
This seventh tone has the same overall structure ["corrispondenza"] as the first: it has cadences in the same positions, similar fugues; only in this is it different: that it is
more languid, since the first possesses a B-natural, and this
seventh has a B-flat....
Although he presents no explanation of the origin of these
modes, nor of their relation to the traditional modes, they are
apparently derived from the common transpositions of the
church modes. The transposition of Dorian to a one-flat signature explains tones 1 and 2. The same transposition of Phrygian results in tones 4 and 5, but the ordering is reversed, and
there is no flat in the signature of the A mode. Lydian was
often changed to Ionian; here tone 5 is Ionian, tone 6 its
transposition. Tone 8 is Mixolydian; tone 7 the range of
Hypomixolydian, but with D as final. Most puzzling is the
identification of the terms authentic and plagal in both church
modes and church keys.
Though Banchieri's presentation may be the earliest in a
treatise, a number of earlier keyboard collections contain a
similar presentation:
72

The anonymous Intavolatura d'organo facilissima accomodata in versetti sopra gli otto tuoni ecclesiastici. . .
(Venice, 1598)20 uses the eight church keys as presented
by Banchieri.
Part I of II Transilvano ...

(Venice, 1593)21 by Girolamo

Diruta (1557-1612) contains a number of toccatas and
other keyboard compositions in various of the 12 modes.
Not all the first eight are included, but those that are
(numbers 1, 2, 3, 6, and 8) agree with Banchieri's presentation.
In the Intonationi d'organo ..
dodeci toni della musica...

composte sopra tutti li

(Venice, 1593),22 which con-

tains compositions by both Gabrielis, the first eight
modes are similar to those of Banchieri (they differ in
number 3, which is here on E, and number 7, which is
here on G).
At some point later in the 17th century the seventh mode
was changed to D with one sharp in the signature, probably
either to differentiate it more clearly from the first mode, or
to present a true transposition of Mixolydian. As a result of
this change, the first four modes now contained a minor
triad, and the last four a major triad. This listing of the church
keys found its way into later treatises, among which the following are German:
Compendium oder Kurtzer Begriff und Einfuhrung zur
Musica sonderlich einem Organisten dienlich, a manuscript treatise by Allessandro Poglietti (d. 1683)23 dating
from before 1676, lists these as the "acht ChoralTone."24

Instructio musicalis Domini Antonii Berthali (1676), a
manuscript treatise, cites these as the "8 Toni" which
are now ("aniezo") in use.25
Idea boni cantoris (Ntirnberg, 1688), by Georg Falck
(1630-1689), cites these as the regular tones or modes
(see below).
Clavis ad thesaurum magnae artis musicae (Prague, 1701),
73

by Thomas Balthasar Janowka, which otherwise lists
only the 24 major and minor keys, refers to these as the
eight tones or modes of chant in the article "Cantus."
Das neu-eroffnete Orchestre (Hamburg, 1713), by Johann
Mattheson, cites these as the first eight of the 24 keys,
and refers to them as the Italian manner of differentiating the keys (see below, pp. 84-5).
Die Kunst des reinen Satzes (1771-79), by Johann Philip
Kirnberger,notes that these keys were probably the first
to be listed since they were the ones most easily performable on organs tuned in meantone temperament.26
Musikalisches Lexikon (Frankfurt, 1802),27 by Heinrich
Christoph Koch, treats the traditional church modes
under the title "Tonart," but lists these church keys
under "Kirchent6ne," after noting the deterioration of
the traditional modes since the time of Pope Gregory.28
A number of German keyboard works used these church
keys well into the 18th century:
Blumen Strauss... in acht tonos ecclesiasticos oder Kirchen
Thon eingetheilet (Augsburg, c. 1702),29by Johann Caspar Ferdinand Fischer (c. 1670-1746), includes one prelude and six fugues in each of the church keys. Tones
numbers 7 and 8 differ from the above listings only in
that they have the modem key signatures for D and G
major.

72. Versetl sammt 12 Toccaten (Vienna, 1726),3? by Gottlieb Muffat (1690-1770), contains settings in the "12
more usable tones." The first eight agree with the church
keys, although all keys use the modern key signatures
except Phrygian.
Certamen aonium ... ab octo tonis...

(Augsburg, 1733),31

by CarlmannKolb (1703-1765), contains settings in the
eight church keys, with the following differences in signatures from older listings: tone 1 has one flat, tone 4
appears both with and without one sharp, and tones 7
and 8 have the modern signatures.
74

Toccate e fughe per l'organo . .. (Augsburg, 1747),32 by

Johann Ernst Eberlin (1702-1762), orders the toccatas
and fugues according to the eight church keys.
The listing of the eight church keys (here called the "regular tones or modes"33) is expanded in Georg Falck's 1688
singing manual (Idea boni cantoris listed above) by the addition of another eight "transposed or ficta tones or modes":
a c-sharp e
According to A dur by the major third
b-flat d f
According to B-flat by the major third
b d f-sharp
According to B by the minor third
c e-flat g
According to C moll by the same
e-flat g b-flat
According to E-flat by the major third
e g-sharpb
According to E by the same
f a-flat c
According to F by the minor third
According to F-sharp by the minor third f-sharp a c-sharp
No scale or signature is presented for these keys; nor is any
major-minor differentiation cited for the first eight.
Note the use of the terms dur and moll in the listing of the
"ficta" modes. Although dur is used for A major and moll for
C minor, Falck does not intend the terms as "major" and
"minor." Later, in the discussion of key signatures, he uses
dur for signatureswith no accidentals or with sharps,and moll
for signatures with flats. Thus, G-flat major would theoretically be a moll triad for Falck.34
The Unterricht der musicalischen

Kunst.. .3

of Daniel

Speer (1636-1707) also lists keys by the tonic triad, dividing
them into three categories:
1. The natural keys, of which there are six: ace, ceg, dfa,
egb, fac, and gbd.
2. The hard or sharp keys ("dur, hart, scharffen"), of which
there are five: ac-sharpe, bd-sharpf-sharp, df-sharpa,
eg-sharpb,gbd.
3. The soft ("mol, weich"), of which there are five: fa-flatc,
gb-flatd, b-flatdf, ce-flatg, e-flatgb-flat.36
Discounting the repetition of G major in the natural and sharp
categories, 15 keys are listed here. B minor and f-sharp minor,
which were listed by Falck, are not here, but B major is added.
In Part II, on thorough-bass, Speer presents the intonations,
75

preludes and toccatinas in 13 of these keys, beginning with
two sharps and ending with two flats:
D with 2 sharps, B with 2 sharps, G with one sharp, E with
one sharp, C with no accidentals, A with no accidentals, A
with two sharps, F with one flat, D with one flat, B-flat
with one flat, G with one flat, E-flat with two flats, and C
with two flats.
Those keys with 2 sharps, one sharp, no accidentals, and one
flat are given modern major and minor key signatures (i.e.,
Ionian and Aeolian signatures). A major is notated with a
Mixolydian signature, G and C minor have Dorian signatures,
and B-flat and E-flat major have Lydian signatures. Once
again, as in Falck, there is no differentiation into major and
minor, and, except for the examples in Part II, no scale or
signature is presented.
Friderich Erhard Niedt (1674-1708) listed 16 keys in his
Musicalische Handleitung (Hamburg, 1710),37 so that an organist playing in any of these keys would know the correct
pitches even if the signature were lacking. He lists the major
and minor forms on all the white keys and on B-flat. For a
number of these an incomplete signature is noted: C minor
with two flats (although a note points out that A-flat is
usually added), G minor with either one or two flats, and A
major with two or three sharps. Because of the rationale of
his selection, Niedt includes two keys with five accidentals
(B major and B-flat minor), while omitting several with only
three or four accidentals (F-sharp and C-sharp minor, and
E-flat and A-flat major).
In 1704 Johann Phillip Treiber (1675-1727) published a
manual with a novel approach to thorough-bass instruction.
Instead of rules and examples, Der accurate Organist (Jena,
1704) uses two chorales, one in major and one in minor,
which are presented in 20 out of the 24 keys. Only the major
keys of F-sharp/G-flat and C-sharp/D-flat and their relative
minors are absent. The key signatures are divided into those
with flats and those with sharps, but apparently no explicit
differentiation is made between major and minor keys.38
If the presentations of Werckmeisterare compared to those
of Falck, Speer, Niedt, and Treiber, it is clear that Werckmeister shows a much more profound understanding of the
76

keys and their use. By basing the use of keys on aspects of
traditional modal theory (cadence structure, modulatory possibilities, melodic structure, etc.), he fills a void found in the
works of those theorists who only recognize the new keys. In
addition, he explicitly discusses the major-minor dichotomy,
which is not even mentioned in some of these other works.
Hence Werckmeister's above-mentioned arguments for maintaining the old modal theory even if only two modes are in
use. Not until Heinichen's treatise of 1711 is there a full discussion in German of the usage of the major and minor keys.39
There are two separate traditions, then, which lead towards
the recognition of 24 major and minor keys in German theory.
Of the several theorists discussed, only Werckmeister mentioned the possibility of 24 keys, omitting, however, a complete listing. Between 1701 and 1713 three writers in German
areas published presentations of the 24 keys: Thomas BalthasarJanowka, Johann David Heinichen, and Johann Mattheson.
These presentations differ from one another in terminology,
in the manner of presentation, in the ordering of the keys in
relation to one another, and in the applicability of the keys
to contemporary music as well as to older music.
The Clavis ad thesaurum magnae artis musicae (Prague,
1701) by the organist Thomas Balthasar Janowka (1660?1715?) is perhaps most remarkable for its complete acceptance of the 24 keys for all music, past as well as present. The
work is organized as a lexicon with several articles dealing
with modes and keys. Janowka appears to be in total ignorance of the traditional church modes and terms associated
with them. In his article on "Cantus" he asserts that the eight
church keys, divided into cantus durus and mollis (in the
meaning of major and minor), and listed with the traditional
Greek names and affects, are the church modes founded by
Pope Gregory and St. Ambrose and used in the Catholic
Church continually since then. Similarly, in the article,
"Tonus," Janowka notes that earlier authors have established
8, 12, or 14 keys (toni). These figures are indeed the common numbers of modes claimed by various sources going back
to the Middle Ages, but they do not refer to the number of
keys of the 24 major and minor, as Janowka intends them.
Ambitus is defined as the range of the human voice or an
77

instrument, not of a mode or key. And finally, the article on
modus only defines the term to mean interval.40
In his discussion of major and minor keys, Janowka presents a major and natural minor scale as a model, notes 12
pitches to the octave, and notates all 24 keys in ascending
chromatic order, each with its proper key signature. In contrast to most earlier works, the complete scale is given for
each key, not merely the tonic or tonic triad. He complains
about incomplete key signatures in current use, particularly
the Dorian signature for minor. Janowka also argues for
another aspect of modern notation-correct spelling of all
pitches, including even B-sharp instead of C in appropriate
circumstances.41The only important aspect of keys not discussed concerns modulatory possibilities. Neither in the section on cadences (where previous theorists discussed this
issue) nor elsewhere does the subject arise.
In its complete acceptance of the 24 keys, and its absolute
silence concerning the old modes, Janowka's work surpasses
even the works of Heinichen and Mattheson. But the Clavis
went virtually unnoticed by his contemporaries. Mattheson,
for example, who often shows a remarkable knowledge of
contemporary literature, did not know of the work in 1713.
The use of Latin, quite unusual at this late date, and the
apparently limited circulation of the work, were probably
factors.
The Neu erfundene und grundliche Anweisung . . . des

General-Basses(Hamburg, 1711) by Johann David Heinichen
(1683-1729) is a much more practical work. It represents the
culmination of the trend found in the practical works of Falck
(1688), Speer (1687 and 1697), and Niedt (1700). There is
virtually no mention of the modes, and major-minor keys are
merely listed. But Heinichen progressed several steps beyond
his predecessors and arrived close to the modern conception
of the 24 keys. He did not present triads, but complete scales
with their modern key signatures (like Janowka). He presented not just some keys, but all. The keys are not ordered
arbitrarily,but divided into major and minor, paired according
to relative majors and minors, listed according to their position on the circle of keys, and presented with a wide range of
tonal modulatory possibilities. Perhaps what is most remark78

able is that Heinichen presented this new development without fanfare. Unlike Werckmeister, who laboriously pondered
each new point and continually questioned its value, and unlike Mattheson, for whom each new development, no matter
how trivial,became the springboardfor lengthy, self-righteous
polemic, Heinichen presented the sum of his accomplishments
as a fait accompli.42Majorand minor are assumed, not argued.
The Dorian form of minor is not accepted: Heinichen instructs the performer to use the minor sixth step of the scale
in all minor keys, even when it is not notated.
A minor has the same ambitus as C major; D minor the
same as F major;E minor the same as G major, and so forth
for all keys.... In all minor keys one must ordinarily use
the minor sixth of the key in which the piece is written,
where it is not already indicated in the signature.43
The performer must be aware of modulations:
When, in this manner, the signatures and the natural ambitus of each key have been firmly imprinted on paper as
well as in hearing, nothing more is required than to keep
attention fixed on where the beginning key, which often
changes in a piece, modulates; and then one begins the signatures once again in this new key, just as they ordinarily
appear according to the model.44
Finally, the musical circle (Plate 1), for which Heinichen is
perhaps most famous, is presented not as a revolutionary
method of establishing a new tonal system, but as a practical
convenience to aid in modulation from one key to another.
Heinichen does not even take credit for the invention of
the musical circle, only for its improvement. He relates that
while he was studying with Johann Kuhnau (1660-1722),45
my teacher told me something of the above-mentioned
circle of [Athanasius] Kircher [1601-80], but this gave me
no satisfaction if I set out to go from a major key to a distantly related minor key and vice versa.... The well-known
method of Kircher, to circulate through all the keys by
fourths and fifths, is one of the most imperfect. For if one
begins, e.g., from a major key, and continues by fourths or
79

Circul.
MuficalifitCr

Pag. i6xI

Plate 1. Heinichen's Musical Circle

(Courtesy of the Music Research Division, New York Public Library)

80

fifths until he returns to the first key, all twelve minor keys
are left out.46
The reference to Kuhnau's teaching is puzzling. The only
extant theoretical treatise of Kuhnau's,his manuscript Fundamenta compositionis (1703)47 written after Heinichen studied
with him, presents the traditional modes. Similarly, in a letter
to Mattheson written in 1717, Kuhnau took exception to the
major and minor keys, arguing for the retention of the Phrygian mode, and perhaps some others as well48 Possibly Kuhnau
had also taught circular harmonic progressions in the manner
of Werckmeister's "circle of the entire keyboard"49discussed
above. The separation of modal theory and circular harmonic
progressions found in the works of Werckmeisterand implied
in the teaching of Kuhnau apparently derives from Kircher.
The treatment of mode in his encyclopedic Musurgiauniversalis (Tomus I, Rome, 1650; 650 pp. in 4?!) is completely

traditional, the only unusual feature being an extensive discussion of transposition.50A harmonic circle ("XVXwOXatv
harmonica") by fourths and fifths appears only as an abstract
concept in the discussion of various types of keyboards. A
particular keyboard with a 16-note octave is capable of such
a "circulatio" but only after passing through three octaves.51
Although Heinichen had assumed that Kircher's circle used
major and minor keys, Heinichen himself was actually the
first theorist to combine in print the concepts of circular
harmonic progressions and key or mode theory.52
In the Neuerfundene Anweisung, Heinichen shows little
respect for the old modes, although he notes in the preface
that one does not necessarily have to do away with them.
After presenting the musical circle, however, he suggests that
the old modes can now pass away.53But in the considerably
enlarged 1728 edition of his treatise,54Heinichen provides a
fuller explanation of his positions, both in the body of the
text and in extensive footnotes. In the chapter on the musical
circle he gives four reasons for the usefulness of the circle.55
He notes that even among musicians who accept the major
and minor keys, there are many who assert that the old modes
are necessary to learn the relationships between keys, and to
learn which keys lie closer and which are more distant from
81

one another. He cites Werckmeister's warning that he who
does not know the modes will enter a labyrinth in his compositions and not know how to proceed.56Heinichen ridicules
this position, asserting that the method of modulation gained
by understanding the modes is treated by him without reference to the modes. According to Werckmeister,one can modulate to those keys whose tonics are found in the tonic triad of
the key or mode in which the modulation begins; for instance,
if one begins in Ionian with the triad ceg, one can modulate
to Phrygian with the triad egb. Heinichen notes that if this is
true, it is the triad only which is necessary. Second, the modulation by thirds that arises is not the only possible one.
This is a crucial point. Earliertheorists, going back at least
to Zarlino, had noted that the three principal cadences (whatever the terminology used) of a mode were to be made on the
lower and upper notes of the species of fifth of the mode, and
on the third which divides the fifth. This was maintained
throughout the 17th century, with exceptions noted only
where cadences on B would be necessary (Phrygian and Mixolydian). Heinichen is no longer willing to accept this. Not only
does the circle pair each major key with its relative minor
(hitherto considered a distant relation in theory) but it also
separates the major keys rather widely from their mediants.
The best ways to modulate through the circle are (1) proceeding through all keys in order to left or to right, or (2)
proceeding through alternate keys in order to right or to left.
Skipping two keys may work for a single modulation, but is
hardly possible for continued use. Heinichen thus largely freed
modulatory possibilities from the old modal bounds.
Other aspects of modal theory are also ridiculed. The assertion that the ambitus of a mode is an octave, give or take a
few notes, is akin to saying that one should use only two or
three fingers, or that only 24 letters of the alphabet should
be used. He closes the discussion with the comment that such
old stupidities ("Thorheiten") should pass, since they are no
longer applicable to our times.
Heinichen's more open antagonism towards the modes in
the 1728 edition may have been inspired by Mattheson's
polemic in the latter's Das beschiitzte Orchestre of 1717.
82

Heinichen, one of the musicians to whom this work was dedicated, wrote to Mattheson on December 7, 1717:
I am a special friend neither of the old imprisoning musical
modes, nor of the superfluous and decayed ut, re, mi, fa,
nor of other dusty musical fads. I admit readily that many
times I have pondered deeply over the fact that, for whatever reason, there are still people in our time who seek to
bring up and defend the long since decayed musical rubbish
of antiquity ....57
Heinichen may have written the first work in the German
language based on the 24 major and minor keys. But it was
Johann Mattheson (1681-1764) who brought the battle between adherents of the major and minor keys and adherents
of the church modes out into the open during the 1710's and
1720's. Mattheson waged a relentless campaign against the
use of the church modes and related antiquities to explain
contemporary music. His wit, satire, irony, and sacrilegious
attitude towards the idols of the past, incited the upholders
of the old order to respond with defenses of their opinions.
On occasion this led to further rejoinders on both sides. As a
result of his attacks, we have the comments of several musicians who might otherwise not have written at length on
these subjects.
Mattheson was a prolific writer who published several thousand pages on music theory, criticism, aesthetics, performance
practice, composition, and history. He read widely and exhibits familiarity with writings on music and other subjects
by a variety of authors,. both contemporary and ancient, in
German, English, French, Italian, Latin, and Greek. In volume
II of his Criticae musicae (Hamburg, 1725) he lists over 400
authors on music to be added to Brossard'slist of 900 at the
end of the latter's Dictionaire (Paris, 1703). That he kept
abreast of contemporary developments is shown in his reference to Alexander Malcolm's A Treatise of Musick (Edinburgh, 1721) only a year after its publication.58In addition to
writing on music, Mattheson composed both vocal and instrumental music. As a true man of the Enlightenment, his life
extended outside the world of music: he was secretary to the
83

British Ambassador in Hamburg, and wrote and translated
works on law, politics, diplomacy, and other subjects. Certainly he ranks as one of the most energetic persons associated
with the history of music.59
It is ironic that Mattheson's first work, which began all the
polemic, uses various aspects of traditional modal theory in
the presentation of the major and minor keys, adopts as a
whole a fairly tolerant attitude towards the church modes,
and is not in general as radical as either Janowka's or Heinichen's treatise. Das Neu-eroffnete Orchestre of 1713 (referred
to hereafter as Orchestre I) contains a full exposition of the
church modes (which are called the "Greek manners of singing" ["Griechische Sing-Arten"]), with the note that "church
and chorale music sometimes use these modes even today,
although with great freedom and changes.60In all his works,
Mattheson was willing to allow the modes a place in church
music. It is for contemporary music that he considered these
modes to be inadequate.
The Italians and contemporary composers use another
means to differentiate their "modulations"61and call
or d minor
dfa
the first key
or g minor
the second key g b-flat d
or a minor
ace
the third key
or e minor
egb
the fourth key
or c major
ceg
the fifth key
or f major
fac
the sixth key
or d major
the seventh key d f-sharp a
or gmajor.
gb d
the eighth key
... Although the above-mentioned eight keys are easily the

best known and most prominent,62 yet
not less useful and acceptable:
c d-sharpg
9.
10.
fg-sharp c
11.
b-flat d f
12.
d-sharpg b-flat
a c-sharp e
13.
e g-sharpb
14.
b d f-sharp
15.
16.
f-sharp a c-sharp
84

the following are

or
or
or
or
or
or
or
or

c minor
f minor
b-flat major
d-sharp major
a major
e major
b minor
f-sharp minor

... Whoever is eager to know all the keys must add the fol-

lowing:
17.
18.
19.
20.
21.
22.
23.
24.
...

b e-flat f-sharp
f-sharp b-flat c-sharp
g-sharpb e-flat
b-flat c-sharp f
g-sharp c e-flat
c-sharp e g-sharp
c-sharp fg-sharp
e-flat f-sharp b-flat

or
or
or
or
or
or
or
or

b major
f-sharp major
g-sharpminor
b-flat minor
g-sharpmajor
c-sharp minor
c-sharp major
e-flat minor.

According to the present division of the keyboard we

have no more than 12 different tones, which are the 12
semitones of the chromatic octave, each of which can be
changed once by the minor or major third; thus the 24
above-mentioned keys arise and remain just 24.63
Mattheson goes on to note that no other author, with the sole
exception of Heinichen, ever presented all these keys.64
Nevertheless, no musician will deny that all such keys are
encountered on the keyboard; and that they can skillfully
be made use of occasionally, provided that the tempering
of the instrument is done properly (which the tuner must
understand), and provided that he who would play thorough-bass is a solid virtuoso, and is well versed in it.65
Mattheson's order of presentation of the keys is in the
tradition of Falck, Speer, and Niedt. Unlike Janowka, who
paired parallel major and minor keys, or Heinichen, who
paired relative major and minors, Mattheson's ordering has no
musical rationale. Not until 1717 did he pair parallel majors
and minors, and not until 1735, in his Kleine General-BassSchule, did he present an "improved" musical circle, in which
he claims that it is "more comfortable" to modulate than in
Heinichen's.
When he comes to list the affects of each new key, Mattheson presents a confusing mixture of old and new theory. He
rejects the opinion that the entire affect resides in the major
or minor third, or in the key signature.66For him each key
has its own affect, and is wholly independent of the others.
He discusses first the affects that the ancients ascribed to the
85

modes, then those of the moderns. Finally, he gives a list of
the affects for each of the keys. Those keys which correspond
by final and third to one of the old modes or to their common
transpositions are referred to by name: D minor (Dorian), G
minor (Dorian transposed), A minor (Aeolian), E minor (Phrygian), C major (Ionian), F major (Ionian transposed), G major
(Hypoionian), B-flat major (Lydian transposed). The inconsistencies are confusing. F major is not referred to as Lydian,
but B-flat major is. G minor is transposed Dorian, and D minor
is referred to as Dorian, but the scale implied is transposed
Aeolian. Mattheson was always interested in the study of
affect, and evidently used the old modal names in order to be
able to refer to the opinions of older authors on the subject.
Thus Lydian, which was not widely used, and therefore had
few affects associated with it, is avoided except where necessary. How seriously Mattheson took the entire subject of
affect is seen by the length of his discussion, which encompasses over 20 pages.67
Mattheson pokes fun at older authors for never referringto
several keys in common use. He notes that D major is not
listed by Kircher, nor is it found among the ancient modes:
"From this, among other things, is seen the defect of ancient
music."68About C minor, he remarks:
It would be no idle curiosity to investigate whether it was
by crass error or by a most profound ignorance that this
most attractive key merited a place neither in the authentic,
plagal or transposed modes, nor even in the ecclesiastic or
Gregorian tones. The stupidity of the ancients is hardly to
be believed, much less excused.69
Like Heinichen and Janowka, Mattheson seems to project the
24 keys on the past and then wonders why no previous author
took the trouble to mention them.
Thus, two conflicting attitudes towards modes and keys
are present in the OrchestreI. On the one hand, the 24 major
and minor keys are presented as the basis of modern music,
and although the old modes are mentioned, earlier authors are
severely criticized wherever they failed to give the major and
minor keys their due. Yet some aspects of the old modes are
retained. Some of this ambivalent attitude towards the modes
86

is explained by Mattheson's encyclopedic approach in the
OrchestreI. In his attempt to provide impressive data, Mattheson perhaps ultimately weakened his case. But by introducing
all this material, seemingly extraneous to the modern knowledge of keys, Mattheson betrays the state of affairs in 1713
all the more clearly. Even a strong advocate of the new keys
in Germany in 1713 felt it proper to try to relate the old
modal names and affects to the new keys. It is significant that
it was only in the 1728 edition, not that of 1711, that Heinichen protested so vigorously against using the names and
attributes of the old modes. The two men's attitudes in 1711
and 1713 may have not been very different, if allowance is
made for Mattheson's posturing.
Johann Heinrich Buttstett (1666-1727), an organist at Erfurt, took sufficient offense at the Orchestre I, however, to
publish an answer. His Ut, mi, sol, re, fa, la, tota musica et
harmonia aeterna (Erfurt, 1715?)70 is perhaps best described
by its title page:
Ut, mi, sol, re, fa, la, tota musica et harmonia aeterna, or
newly published, old, true, sole and eternal Foundation of
Music, opposed to theNeu-er6ffnete Orchestre,and divided
into two parts, in which, and to be sure in the first part, the
erroneous opinions of the author of the Orchestre with
respect to tones or modes in music are refuted. In the
second part, however, the true foundation of music is
shown, Guidonian solmisation is not only defended, but
also shown to be of special use in the introduction of a
fugal answer; lastly, it will also be maintained that some
day everyone will make music in heaven with the same
syllables that are used here on earth.
Ut mi sol is the first of a number of extremely conservative
German works of the first half of the 18th century (others,
to be discussed below, are by Murschhauserand Spiess). In
his definitions of the modes, Buttstett wanted to turn the
clock back to the mid-16th century, before Zarlino's differentiation of the affects of the modes according to the quality
of certain important consonances. He defends the church
modes, asserting that the placement of the semitone is the
only criterion for differentiating modes, so that all of Matthe87

son's keys are transpositions of only two modes. And, as he
quotes Printz, transposition is "more a folly and a blunder
which corrupts the harmony, than an art."7' In the practice
of solmisation, moreover, he wanted to return to the status
quo of the 15th century, before Ramos de Parejaadvocated a
seven-syllable solmisation based on the octave.72 His defense
of the Guidonian system of solmisation with three hexachords
and the technique of mutation is consistent with his acceptance of the church modes as the sole basis of music. In majorminor tonality, there are only two basic scale constructions
above the tonic that a beginning student has to learn. In the
church modes, however, there are six basic scale constructions. By learning a single hexachord construction, and using
mutation where necessary, any modal melody can be easily
learned.73
Yet despite his fervor, Buttstett, already in the title of his
work, indicates the basic dichotomy between major and
minor. The syllables are ordered, ut, mi, sol, re, fa, la-the
major and minor triads.74Walther Blankenburg has pointed
out representations of the major and minor triads in the
frontispiece.75 Johann Lippius's treatment of the triad, with
its analogies to the Holy Trinity, so revolutionary a century
earlier, had now become part of "ancient" tradition.76
Mattheson answered Buttstett with Das beschutzte Orchestre (The Orchestre Defended [Hamburg, 1717]; referred
to hereafter as Orchestre II). It is a merciless satire of Buttstett's opus, beginning in the subtitle: "Ut, Mi, Sol, Re, Fa,
La-Todte (nicht Tota) Musica."The frontispiece mocks Buttstett's admiration of solmisation with a tombstone erected to
Guido of Arezzo. Mattheson derides Buttstett's scholarly pretentions, and ridicules the differentiation of modes based on
the placement of the semitones. Buttstett had asserted that
there is only one natural semitone in music-mi, fa-and that
it occurs twice in each diatonic octave, creating six primary
modes. Mattheson's 24 keys are all transpositions of only two
modes. Mattheson answers first by noting that Buttstett claims
one semitone, two semitones per octave, and 12 semitones
per octave. How can there be only one, yet also two and 12
of something? For Mattheson, all semitones are natural. If
you ask a peasant to sing a song, he will start on any com88

fortable pitch, and will sing D-sharp-E or D-E-flat just as
easily as he will sing B-C or E-F. The keys in use in contemporary music are differentiated by the register of the final
tone, the proportions of the tempered scale, and the triad,
but in no way by the placement of the semitone.77
Mattheson accuses Buttstett of hiding the context of
Printz's comment on transposition. According to Mattheson,
Printz was complaining about transpositions on untempered
instruments, and had no intention of prohibiting the use of
keys such as C, F, B, and F-sharpminor and B, E, and A major.
For Mattheson each major and minor scale is original, and
none is the exact transposition of any other. In the meantone
temperament he advocated, the tuning of each is different
from any other-hence, each key is unique.78That the C major
scale is considered the diatonic genus is only an accident of
notation, not a sign that it is more original than any other.79
He quotes from Werckmeister'sHypomnemata musica (1697):
Why do upright musicians love transpositions so much? If
they did not introduce pleasant variations, one would probably not think of them. The varied charm consists not only
in the high or low register of the notes; rather, the difference and beat of the consonances and the dissimilarity of
the tones and semitones impart an entirely different nature
to the harmony.8?
In other aspects as well, Mattheson's concept of key is not
entirely in agreement with later interpretations. He argues
that semitone differences in a given scale are unimportant, so
long as they do not alter the quality of the third:
If I prelude for a peasant in the octave species d e f-sharp
g a b c d (transposed Mixolydian), for instance, and then
prelude in d e f-sharp g a b c-sharp d (transposed Ionian)
and he notes the difference, I will reward him. But if I play
C minor for him only a few times, and then play D minor,
if he does not sense this difference, he has either no ears or
no soul.81
A similar point arises in a letter from Johann Kuhnau to
Mattheson, written in answer to the Orchestre I.82 Kuhnau,
although praising Mattheson for his side of the argument,
89

expresses doubts about dropping all the old modes, particularly the Phrygian mode. Neither the major nor minor keys
have a semitone above the final. How, Kuhnau asks, are
Phrygian chorales to be elaborated in these new keys? Mattheson's answer is in two parts. First he notes that although
all the keys begin with an ascent of a whole tone, in some
keys there is a major tone, while in others the whole tone is
minor. Then he notes,
If, accidentally (outside of chorales), Phrygian and Hypophrygian phrases appear in a galant work, so long as it is
required by the integrity of the song, this is not only possible, but must be considered as beautiful and moving.83
But this is not the way to expand the number of modes or
keys. Mattheson's insistence on the quality of the third as the
sole criterion for differentiating the keys allows him virtually
to ignore the remaining scale steps.
The same point is raised in the letter exchange with Fux,
also written in reply to Orchestre II. Fux notes that all of
Mattheson's 24 keys were merely two modes, since they'had
the semitones in the same positions. Mattheson responds by
listing 24 scales, each with the semitones in a different position, and each with the notation dur or moll based on the
quality of the third, showing "that such changes of the semitones can contribute to the properties of today's modes little
or not at all."84
Mattheson is not adverse to arguing two sides of an issue.
He states that there are only two types of modes or keys.
When he is charged with limiting compositional resources
through this reduction in the number of modes from 12 to 2,
however, he retorts that each major and minor key is unique
because of the differences in temperament-but there are still
only two types of keys! If the mythical Thuringian peasant
he uses as an empirical proof cannot differentiate Ionian from
Mixolydian, will he hear differences of a fraction of a tone?
Each major or minor key is a transposition of the scale structure of all others. Yet the scales can be changed without
altering the key, so long as the major or minor third is maintained. In effect, each key is unique and "original." Yet he is
90

hard put to find the affects for the last eight keys because
they have not been used.
Finally, Mattheson still recognizes the use of the old modes
for chorales:
For, although one could get along according to today's
manner with two types of modes, yet the old modes, and
much less the 24 contemporary species, should not therefore be wholly and completely discarded, because our dear
church songs, which in part are ordered according to the
former, merit much respect from everyone. On the other
hand, today's use of the modes [i.e., the 24 keys] also has
its correctness and indicated ways, as a result of which
there is no disorder and the digressions from the mode,
when they follow nature and reason, remain proper. I will
present my opinion of their characteristics most briefly, in
order to show that I am not one of those who despise the
old modes or discard them entirely out of ignorance.85
Mattheson dedicated the OrchestreII to thirteen prominent
contemporary musicians, to whom he appealed for an "entirely impartial, free and candid opinion" of his views. Of the
musicians who wrote replies to Mattheson, a number commented specifically on modes and keys. All the letters, together with Mattheson's answers where questions were raised,
were printed by Mattheson in Criticaemusicae I (1725), under
the heading: "The Orchestre-Chancellery,or testimonies, letters, declarations, investigations, etc., by the former judges in
the Orchestre trial." Among the favorable comments specifically on the subject of the modes are those by Georg Friderich
Hendel (sic; 1685-1759), with whom Mattheson had been
close friends and had fought a duel in 1704, Johann David
Heinchen (1683-1729),86 and Johann Krieger(1651-1735).
Only Handel will allow the modes for those who practice
old music:
As concerns the Greek modes, I find that you have said
everything that there is to say. Their knowledge is doubtless necessary to those who want to practice and perform
ancient music, which formerly was composed according to
such modes; however, since now we have been freed from
91

the narrow bounds of the ancient music, I cannot perceive
what use the Greek modes have in today's music.87
Krieger's letter, which comments on each chapter of the Orchestre II, observes:
I say this: the doctrine of solmisation and modes belongs
to ancient music.... Concerning their use in today's music,
I consider them unnecessary, troublesome and inadequate
things....88

Johann Kuhnau's doubts about giving up the Phrygian mode,
included in his letter, have already been mentioned.
By far the most important letter of this group, at least for
the present study, is the one from Johann Joseph Fux, Capellmeister in Vienna, and later the author of the most important
counterpoint text since Zarlino: the Gradus ad parnassum,
sive manductio ad compositionem musicae regularem(Vienna,
1725).89 He wrote on December 4, 1717, criticizing Mattheson's positions on modes and solmisation. Mattheson replied
on December 18th. Fux and Mattheson each wrote one more
letter, dated, respectively, January 12, 1718 and February 12,
1718.90 The complete letter exchange is one of the most important documents we possess concerning developments of
modes and keys in the 1710's and 1720's.
Fux appears here as a staunch defender of the church
modes. For him, these are the basis of all music, ancient and
modern, sacred and secular. Differentiations between modes
are based solely on the position of the semitone in the diatonic octave. The 24 keys are, for him, only transpositions of
Ionian and Aeolian modes. Fux also defends Guidonian solmisation, with six syllables, complete with the system of
mutation, noting that he still uses it in Vienna.
Fux's position as expressed in these letters pertains directly
to the interpretation of his Gradus, particularly with respect
to the use of the church modes. Mode is discussed in two
passages in the Gradus, the first just before the study of fugue
and the second which presents much the same material but in
more detail, at the end of the treatise. Fux notes that the subject of mode is highly complex, and announces his intention
to mention only the most important points. Mode is defined
92

by the placement of the semitones in a diatonic scale,91and
further by the placement of the fourth and fifth within the
octave. There are six modes, and two forms of each. Josephus
asks at one point whether all contemporary teachers have the
same opinion of the 12 modes. Aloysius answers that there
are differing opinions, but mentions only different countings
of the church modes.92 There is no mention of major and
minor keys eight years after the letter exchange with Mattheson.
Some modern commentators have argued that Fux used
the church modes in the Gradus merely for pedagogical purposes. Alfred Mann, for instance, writes in the introduction
to Steps to Parnassus: "As a basis Fux chose the series of
'natural' tonalities, the old church modes which despite many
attacks have, with the help of his teaching, proved their value
throughout centuries of use."93In The Study of Fugue, Mann
writes that Fux chose Palestrina as a model in order to use a
style which emphasized equal treatment of all voices. This
circumstance
explains his retention of the modes, the theoretical basis of
Palestrina's music. Indeed, in this presentation, Glarean's
six authentic scales4 offered Fux's student both a melodiclinear wealth which his own time had lost and the harmonic
organization which it had conquered; studying the structure
of the six basic modes and the essential intervals and
cadences, he learned to understand the harmonic aspects of
fugue while perceiving its melodic and linear aspects far
more consciously than the limitation to two modes-major
and minor-would allow.95
But Fux did not "choose" to use the modes; they were the
only tonalities he recognized, as shown in this correspondence
written eight years before the publication of the Gradus.
96
It should be emphasized here that Mattheson was not adverse to the use of the modes for teaching purposes (or for
church music, as noted above). In 1731, in his Grosse GeneralBass-Schule, he hailed an announced German translation of
Fux's Gradus.97 Indeed, Mattheson himself may have planned a
translation.9 Fux and Mattheson were not arguing in 1717
over the best way to teach music; they were arguing about
93

which tonal system was best for the understanding of contemporary music.
Closely related to the question of Fux's purposes in using
the modes is that of whether his work is to be understood as
a general composition text, as a manual only intended for
a capella style, or as a textbook in a purposely artificial style
intended to make it timeless. Arnold Feil has argued that it is
a pedagogical work for beginners only, written in an artificial
style, and that the modes are used to insure its isolation from
contemporary practice.9 Hugo Riemann asserted that the
work was out of date before it was written.100Peter Benary
expressed a similarsentiment, and summed up Fux's contribution to music theory in the Gradusas basically conservative.101
Lorenz Mizler, in his 1742 German translation of the Gradus,
notes after the second discussion of the modes that "what the
capable Fux states here about the keys, that has all been set
forth much more clearly in our time."'02 Certainly Mizler did
not believe that a revolution in teaching had occurred in the
17 years since the first publication of the Gradus.
Helmut Federhofer argued that the work is a composition
text. Counterpoint was a legitimate type of composition, and
was a standard part of pedagogy, along with thorough-bass.
The basic rules learned in the Gradus were applicable to all
musical styles.103After teaching counterpoint and fugue, Fux
concludes his treatise with a study of the more complex dissonance usages in other styles in a manner not dissimilar to
that found in Christoph Bernhard's Tractatus compositionis
augmentatus.104
The evidence of this letter exchange with Mattheson supports this interpretation of the Gradusas a composition text.
Fux as a composer wrote in both the old a capella style (prima
prattica) and in more modern idioms. But the church modes
were an intimate part of his thinking in all musical styles.
Although Mattheson wrote a number of works on composition after 1725, his opinions on the keys did not change substantially. One important distinction not found in his earlier
works appears at the beginning of chapter 9 of Der vollkommene Capellmeister (Hamburg, 1739). He notes that Ton
or Ton-Art refers to the placement of the final pitch, while
Modus gives the species within the octave. This differentiation
94

of terms is also found in Alexander Malcolm's (b. 1687) A
Treatise of Musick (Edinburgh, 1721), a work known to Mattheson. Apparently, the Frenchman Michel de St.-Lambert
(dates unknown) was the first to make this distinction in his
Nouveau traitedel'accompagnement (Amsterdam, ca. 1710).105
Buttstett's Ut mi sol was not the only work written in
answer to Mattheson's Orchestre I of 1713. Franz Xaver
Anton Murschhauser(1663-1738) published in 1721 the first
volume of a projected two-volume treatise, Academia musicopoetica ....

The section on modes includes three separate

parts: the eight psalm tones, the eight Gregorianmodes, and
the 12 church modes used for "figural"music.106The work was
severely criticized by Mattheson in Critica musica, Volume I
(1722) in a section entitled "The compositional light-snuffers"
("Die melopoetische Licht-Scheere"). This subtitle is in
answer to the inscription found on some copies of Murschhauser's work: "in order to bring a little more light to the
excellent Herr Mattheson." Possibly as a result of this criticism, or for other unknown reasons, the second volume never
appeared.
In 1745, Meinrad Spiess (1683-1761) published a lavish
treatise in which, once again, the 24 keys are rejected as
transpositions of only two modes.107The Tractatus musicus
compositorio-practicus was reprinted in a second edition the
following year.10 Among other comments, Spiess notes that
modern composers have limited themselves to only two
modes. The mode on E with F-natural is used in the church,
but not in the opera house: God has blinded the opera composers to the beautiful melodies possible in this mode to prevent them from profaning the mode. Among the advantages
of the old modes are that it is easier to compose a fugue,
there are more compositional possibilities, and there are more
affects. On a number of important details, however, Spiess
accepts modern terms. The 64-year-old Mattheson did not
lift his pen, and Spiess was spared a fresh onslaught of
polemic.
With the exception of Spiess's anomalous work, the treatises of Buttstett, Murschhauserand Fux were the last works
published in German-speaking areas to advocate the use of
church modes as the basis of all modern music. But this did
95

not indicate the end of the modal tradition in Germany. The
dual modal and tonal theories were kept alive by the vast
majority of treatises published in German virtually through
the end of the 18th century. And so the national region which
gave rise to the first true theory of major-minor keys at the
beginning of the 17th century, and presented the first theory
of 24 equal and original keys at the beginning of the 18th
century, continued the dual traditions of church modes and
major-minor keys from 1610 through the Baroque and well
into the Classic periods.
NOTES
1. See the discussion of his Instructio musicalis Domini Antonii Berthali
(1676) in Helmut Federhofer's "Zur handschriftlichen Uberlieferung
der Musiktheorie in Osterreich in der zweiten Halfte des 17. Jahrhunderts," Die Musikforschung, XI (1958), pp. 264-79.
2. See the discussion below of his Das neu-eroffnete Orchestre (1713).
3. See Joel Lester, "Major-minor Concepts and Modal Theory in Germany: 1592-1680," in Journal of the American Musicological
Society, xxx< 1977), 208-57.
4. Published undated. The date is found in the introduction to the
Harmonologia musica (1702).
5. The second, third, fifth, and sixth treatises on this list have been
published in facsimile editions (Hildesheim, 1970).
6. Harmonologia, p. 56.
7. Musicae mathematicae, pp. 123 and 112.
8. That is, in the upper fourth of the modal octave.
9. Musicae mathematicae, pp. 124-125. A similar complaint against the
terms dur and moll is found in Georg Andreas Sorge's Vorgemach
der musicalischen Composition (Lobenstein, 1745), p. 27. In Karl
Geiringer's Bach (New York, 1954, p. 278) and in The Bach Reader,
edited by Hans David and Arthur Mendel (New York, 1966, p. 85),
the authors assert that terms for major and minor were not yet in
general use in 1722 when J. S. Bach worded his elaborate reference
to them on the title page of the Wohltemperiertes Clavier: "preludes
and fugues through all the tones and semitones both as regards the
tertia major or Ut Re Mi and as concerns the tertia minor or Re Mi
Fa." This in spite of Werckmeister's complaint of 1687 that dur and
moll were in such common use that he would accept them, even
though he did not approve of them. Indeed, Bach's own GrLindlicher
Unterricht des General-Basses (published in Philipp Spitta, Bach,
2nd ed., Leipzig, 1916, vol. II, pp. 915-950) uses dur and moll to

96

10.
11.
12.
13.

14.
15.
16.
17.
18.
19.

mean major and minor in at least two passages (pp. 917 and 920).
Bach's title to the Wohltemperiertes Clavier was possibly so worded
in order to surpass Johann Kuhnau's two collections of 7 partitas
each on "UT, RE, MI or the major third of each tone" and "on
RE, MI, FA or the minor third of each tone" (Neuer ClavierUbung, 1689, 1692; reprinted with original title pages in Denkmaler
deutscher Tonkunst, IV [Leipzig, 1901]). Bach's compositions are
on all the tones and semitones, in contrast to Kuhnau's partitas
written only on the tones (C, D, E, F, G, A, and B-flat or B). Bach
wrote the title page the year that Kuhnau died after a long illness,
vacating the prestigious post at the Leipzig Thomaskirche for which
Bach applied.
Pp. 85-89.
P. 123.
P.69.
Orgel-Probe, p. 79. On p. 37 of the Hypomnemata, Werckmeister
refers to a Canzona by Froberger composed some 30 years ago, in
which the theme is transposed "through the entire keyboard on all
12 keys... through the circle of fifths or fourths."
Pp. 20-22.
Pp. 50-51. See Joel Lester, "Major-minor Concepts," footnote 77,
for a discussion of the origins of the enharmonic spellings used here.
Harmonologia, p. 58.
E.g., Conrad Matthaei in Bericht von den Modis Musicis (1652). See
Joel Lester, "Major-minor Concepts," p. 249-50.
L 'Organo suonarino (Venice, 1605), Part II, "sopra gli Otto Tuoni
spettanti al Canto fermo Ecclesiastico."
Walter Atcherson discusses these in his "Key and Mode in 17th
Century Music Theory Books" (Journal of Music Theory, XVII
[1973], 204- 232), calling them "pitch-key modes." I have used the
term church keys as a close translation of the name given to them
in several languages by 17th century theorists: Banchieri's "tones of
ecclesiastical plain chant," "Choral-T6ne" in a German treatise by
Poglietti (see below), and "acht tonos ecclesiasticos oder Kirchen
Thon" in a keyboard collection by Fischer (see below), among
others. "Pitch-key modes" also contains the problematic pairing of
"key" and "mode" in a single term. Atcherson errs in calling them
a "strictly seventeenth-century phenomenon" (p. 216); they are
used from the late 16th until well into the 18th century, and are
even cited in Koch's Musikalisches Lexikon of 1802 (article "Kirchent6ne," pp. 833-834). Furthermore, Atcherson's discussion contains confusing language on the differentiation of mode and key.
Contrary to Atcherson's assertions, all major keys (like all minor
keys) are transpositions of one another, just as modes can be transposed (cf. observation 2., p. 208); ambitus, if understood not merely as the range of the mode, but as the scalar content of that range,
is as relevant to key as to mode (cf. observations 1. and 5., p. 208);
and it is the modes, not keys, at least since Glarean, that have been

97

20.
21.
22.
23.
24.
25.
26.
27.
28.

29.

30.
31.
32.
33.
34.

35.
36.
37.

98

thought of as octave species (i.e., different organizations of whole
and half steps) as much as species of 4ths and 5ths (cf. observation
4., p. 208; and see Joel Lester, "Major-minor Concepts," pp. 209 ff).
Indeed, this last point is perhaps the most crucial. The difference
between, e.g., Ionian and major is that Ionian is conceived melodically as an octave species, whereas major is a harmonic concept
denoting major harmonic intervals over a few principal pitches.
When differentiating major keys from one another, e.g., E-flat major
from C major, the pitch name gives the level of transposition, and
the term major gives the harmonic mode.
Transcribed by Macario Santiago Kastner, and published as Altitalienische Versetten fur Orgel oder andere Tasteninstrumente (Mainz,
1957).
Facsimile, Bologna, 1969.
Reprinted as Composizioni per organo, ed. Dalla Libera (1956).
According to Walther's Lexicon Poglietti was a German (article
Polietti, p. 486).
See Helmut Federhofer, "Zur handschriftlichen Uberlieferung,"
p. 275.
Ibid., p. 274.
Part II, p. 66; Kirnberger lists tones number 7 and 8 as G and A major.
Facsimile, Hildesheim, 1964.
Pp. 833-34. See Herbert Schneider, Die Franzdsische Kompositionslehre in der ersten Hdlfte des 1 7.Jahrhunderts (Tutzing, 1972),
pp. 271-73 for a listing of French treatises of the early 17th century mentioning the church keys.
Published undated. Walther's Lexicon dates it about the same time
as Fischer's Ariadne (1702). See also Lothar Hoffmann-Erbrecht in
Die Musikforschung, V (1952), p. 349. The collection is reprinted,
edited by Rudolf Walter (Altotting, 1956).
Facsimile edition New York, 1967. Reprinted, edited by Guido
Adler (Vienna, 1922).
Reprinted, edited by Rudolf Walter (Alt6tting, 1957).
Reprinted, edited by Rudolf Walter (Altotting, 1958).
Tone 7 is listed with F-sharp (pp. 85-86).
P. 38. Note that similar or identical meanings of dur and moll are
found in Daniel Speer's Unterricht and in Janowka's Clavis. See
also Johann Philipp Eisel's Musicus autodidaktos (Erfurt, 1738), p.
15. Jacob Adlung comments on this usage in his bibliographical
Anleitung zu der musikalischen Gelahrtheit (Erfurt, 1758; facsimile
Kassel, 1953), p. 218. Carl Dahlhaus's study, "Die Termini Dur und
Moll," lists nine distinct meanings of dur and moll from antiquity
to the 17th century, but omits this usage (Archiv fir Musikwissenschaft, XII (1955), pp. 280-96).
Ulm, 1687; 2nd edition 1697 (facsimile edition, Leipzig, 1974).
2nd edition, p. 20.
The first edition was published in 1700. Although Niedt planned a
three-part work, only the first two parts appeared during his life-

38.

39.

40.

41.
42.

43.
44.
45.

time. The remaining part and the second edition of the second part
were published posthumously, edited by Johann Mattheson. Since
it is unclear to what extent Mattheson may have altered Niedt's
work, only the first part is treated here as Niedt's own. (The second
part, on variation, contains no discussion of the modes.)
I have not seen a copy of Der accurate Organist, and have taken the
information presented here from Frank Thomas Arnold's The Art
of Accompaniment from a Thorough-Bass (London, 1931, reprinted
New York, 1965), pp. 243-47. Arnold does not state categorically
whether or not Treiber makes an explicit differentiation between
major and minor. The two chorales are "Was Gott thut, das ist
wohlgethan" (Hypoionian), and "Wer nun den lieben Gott last
walten" (Hypoaeolian). Note that Treiber and Niedt, both musical
amateurs, presented several keys earlier than many of their professional colleagues.
Walter Atcherson, "Key and mode," p. 228, concludes that major
and minor did not descend from Ionian and Aeolian because "1)
Those who dealt with two modes and treated them as "modes," i.e.,
subjected them to transposition, generally chose Ionian and Dorian.
2) Those who dealt with two modes, one on C and one on A, treated them as keys from the start and ignored their fortuitous similarity to Ionian and Aeolian respectively. Meanwhile there existed
other groping attempts to arrive at the concept of key, notably on
the part of theorists of the pitch-key modes, which, however, proved
fruitless." The two numbered assertions are completely contradicted
by Werckmeister, surely the most important and learned German
theorist of the end of the century. Furthermore, the "pitch-key"
mode theorists (e.g., Falck) did gradually increase the number of
keys formally recognized. Indeed, Mattheson stands as the culmination of this process, using the church keys as the first eight in his
complete listing of the 24 keys.
This usage dates back to Boethius ("Modus est soni acuti gravisque
distantia"), and was common among medieval and Renaissance
theorists. In the MGG article, "Modus," Heinrich Huschen lists no
works after the Musices libri II (Wittenberg, 1561) by Martin Agricola (1486-1556) which use this terminology. It appears, however,
not only in Janowka but also Heinrich Buttstett's Ut, mi, sol (c.
1715;see below)and in Johann Walther's Lexicon of 1732 (p. 417).
Both Heinichen and Mattheson use the older letter notation in
1711 and 1713, respectively.
Only in the preface does polemic intrude, when Heinichen complains about those supposedly learned theorists who often do not
have any practical knowledge of music. In the body of the work,
there are few such comments.
Pp. 104 and 199.
P. 204.
Heinichen was a student at the Thomasschule in Leipzig from 1696
to 1702. Kuhnau was in Leipzig after 1682, and was Cantor at the

99

46.
47.

48.
49.
50.
51.
52.

53.
54.

55.
56.
57.
58.
59.
60.
61.

62.
63.

100

Thomasschule from 1701 until his death in 1722, when J. S. Bach
assumed the post.
Der General-Bass in der Composition (Dresden, 1728), pp. 840 and
837.
See Kurt Hahn, "J. Kuhnau's Fundamenta compositionis" in the
Kongressbericht Hamburg 1956 of the Gesellschaft fur Musikforschung (Kassel, 1957), pp. 103-5. It is unclear from Hahn's account
whether or not the section on modes is a copy of Christoph Bernhard's Tractatus compositionis augmentatus. Johann Walther's
Lexicon lists two other manuscript treatises by Kuhnau, but both
are lost.
See below, p. 89-90.
Hypomnemata musica, p. 26.
Mode is discussed in Book III, chapters 15-17, and Book IV, chapters 7-8.
Pp. 457 and 462-63.
Although he was certainly the first to combine these theories in
print, the manner of presentation suggests an oral tradition going
back to an earlier date. It is difficult to assess such oral or pedagogical traditions except where they appear in print or in manuscript
treatises.
P. 267.
Heinichen apparently began work on this version, titled Der GeneralBass in der Composition (Dresden, 1728), not long after the 1711
work. By 1722 the first part of the treatise was already set in type
(see p. 938).
Part II, Chapter 5, pp. 837-916. The last of these is the same as that
on p. 267 of the first edition.
See Werckmeister's Harmonologia musica, p. 73.
Published in Mattheson's Criticae Musicae II (Hamburg, 1725; facsimile Amsterdam, 1964), pp. 212-13.
Critica musica, I (Hamburg, 1722), p. 8.
See Beekman Cannon, Johann Mattheson, Spectator in Music (New
Haven, 1947), for a complete biography.
P. 57.
The term "modulation" carried several meanings during this period.
See Alfred Mann, The Study of Fugue (New York, 1958), pp. 5354, and William Mitchell, "Modulation in C. P. E. Bach's Versuch,"
in Studies in 18th-Century Music, a Tribute to Karl Geiringer ...
(New York, 1970), pp. 333-42. In this passage it appears to connote "types of compositions."
They are of course the church keys.
Orchestre I, pp. 60-63. The following errors have been corrected
here: no. 21 is mistakenly printed as g-sharp minor, no. 22 is
printed as c-sharp major. In the pitch notation, the letter b is used
for B-flat; the letter h for B. Some E-flats are notated by the symbol "$"; all other accidentals are written as sharps, notated " e."

64. Mattheson did not know of Janowka's listing, nor of those by the
French mathematician Ozanam (1640-1717) in his Dictionaire
Mathematique (Amsterdam, 1691, p. 660) and by Alexandre Frere
in his Transpositions de musique (Paris, 1706).
65. Orchestre I, p. 64.
66. "Those who are of the opinion that the entire secret resides in the
minor or major third and would prove that all minor keys, speaking
generically, are necessarily sad, and on the contrary, that all major
keys commonly foster a lusty character-it is not so much that they
are wrong, but they have not yet gone far enough in their investigations. Those who are of the opinion that if a piece has a signature
with flats it must necessarily sound soft and tender; if, however, it
is set with one or more sharps, then its nature must be hard, fresh
and gay-they have even less going for them" (ibid., p. 232). In
later works he even argues that the tuning of each key is different
(see below, fn. 78).
67. Pp. 231-52.
68. Ibid., pp. 242-43.
69. Ibid., p. 245.
70. Published undated. Mattheson's Orchestre I appeared in 1713. Buttstett notes in the preface that he has promised the work already for
a year (fol. 5r). Mattheson's Das beschutzte Orchestre, written in
answer to Ut, mi, sol, was presumably published by the middle of
1717 (letters to Mattheson in answer were dated as early as December, 1717). This second Orchestre probably took a fair time in
preparation; Ut, mi, sol, therefore, was probably published in 1715
or early 1716. The date 1717, given by Blankenburg ("Der Titel und
das Titelbild von Johann Heinrich Buttstedts Schrift 'Ut, mi, sol,
re, fa, la, Tota Musica et Harmonia Aeterna oder Neu-eroffnetes,
altes, wahres, einziges und ewiges Fundamentum Musices (1717),"
Die Musikforschung, III (1950), pp. 64-66) and also used in RISM,
is almost certainly too late.
71. Ut, mi, sol, p. 49. Taken from Printz's Satyrischer Componist (Dresden and Leipzig, 1696), Part I, Chapter II, par. 6.
72. Musica practica (Bologna, 1482).
73. This is the very reason given by Guido of Arezzo in his Epistola de
ignoto cantu (ca. 1030) for his invention of the hexachord. See the
English translation in Oliver Strunk, Source Readings in Music History (New York, 1950), pp. 121-25. Mattheson, in the Orchestre I,
advocated using letters of the alphabet (with suffixes to indicate
accidentals) rather than solmisation.
74. The title is incorrectly listed as Ut, re, mi, fa, sol, la in Walther's
Lexicon (1732), an inaccuracy continued in many later works,
including even Ernst Ziller's monograph, "Der Erfurter Organist
Johann Heinrich Buttstadt" (Halle/Salle, 1935), p. 81.
75. "Der Titel und das Titelbild."
76. In the Orchestre I, Mattheson derides such theological references to
the triad (pp. 109-10), apparently unaware that it was precisely
101

77.

78.

79.

80.
81.
82.
83.
84.
85.
86.
87.
88.
89.

90.

because of the analogy to the trinity that Lippius coined the term
trias harmonica.
P. 73. In later works, Mattheson turned to older sources to argue
that modes were not differentiated by octave species until the later
15th century. The ancient Greek modes differed in register, not
octave species. Nowhere in the works of Boethius is the octave
species mentioned. Mattheson argues that it was not until Gafurius
and Glarean that the octave species were cited as the basis of the
modes, and that the problems of modal theory can be traced to
them. See Mattheson's Der vollkommene Capellmeister (Hamburg,
1739; facsimile Kassel, 1954), Chapter 9, pp. 60-68.
Mattheson discusses the various tunings of intervals in his Exemplarische Organisten-Probe im Artikel vom General-Bass. . .
(Hamburg, 1719, pp. 52-112). He recommends a tuning of the
chromatic octave in which the I, IV, and V chords in C, E, and G
major are tuned to pure thirds and fifths. The sole remaining pitch
in the chromatic octave is B-flat, tuned to a major third below D.
This system gives rise to four sizes of semitones and four sizes of
whole tones. Only two pairs of keys (C and E major, and F and A
major) share identical tunings. Mattheson notes that the chromatic
tones in these keys will differ in tuning. (See pp. 57-59 and p. 60
for the tables which best illustrate these tunings.)
The treatment of all keys as equally original differentiates the
theories of Janowka, Heinichen, and Mattheson from many more
or less contemporary French presentations of 24 keys. See Joel
Lester, "Major-minor Concepts," fn. 85.
P. 33.
P. 82.
Printed in Mattheson's Criticae musicae, II (1725), pp. 229-39.
Criticae musicae, II, p. 242.
Some of these scales are rather bizarre, including, e.g., F G-sharp A
B-flat C D E-flat F, and D E-flat F G-sharp A B-flat C-sharp D. (See
ibid., p. 195.)
Orchestre II, p. 382.
Heinichen's name was spelled this way in the 1711 edition of his
thorough-bass treatise. See above, p. 83, for an excerpt from this
letter.
Handel's letter, written in French, is printed along with Mattheson's
German translation on pp. 210-11. The letter is dated London,
February 24, 1719.
Pp. 216-19.
See Alfred Mann, Steps to Parnassus (New York, 1943) and The
Study of Fugue, pp. 78-138, for English translations of books I
and II. The introduction and notes to Steps to Parnassus give complete bibliographical details and include a history of all translations.
The 1725 edition appears in facsimile (New York, 1966).
Criticae musicae II, pp. 185-205. Translated by this author. "The
Fux-Mattheson Correspondence: An Annotated Translation," Current Musicology, no. 24 (1977), pp. 37-62.

102

91. The Study of Fugue, p. 80.
92. Latin edition of 1725, pp. 221-22 ff.; German translation by
Lorenz Mizler (Leipzig, 1742), pp. 160-61 ff.
93. P. 12.
94. Because of his peculiar nomenclature for the modes, Fux's usage
can be traced to Zarlino, not to Glarean. See Joel Lester, "Majorminor Concepts," fn. 18.
95. Pp. 53-54.
96. Friedrich Wilhelm Riedel's rather hypothetical reconstruction of
Fux's library includes not a single treatise which contains the
major-minor keys. See "Johann Joseph Fux und die romische
Palestrina-Tradition," in Die Musikforschung, XIV (1961), pp. 1422.
97. "Ode on seeing a translation of Fux's Gradus ad Parnassum announced in the catalog of the musical works of M. Telemann"
(p. 181).
98. Alfred Mann, Steps to Parnassus, p. 10.
99. "Zum Gradus ad Parnassum von J. J. Fux," Archiv far Musikwissenschaft, XIV (1957), pp. 184-192.
100. Geschichte der Musiktheorie (Leipzig, 1898), p. 415.
101. Die deutsche Kompositionslehre des 18. Jahrhunderts (Leipzig,
1961), p. 80.
102. P. 165 in Mizler's translation.
103. "Johann Joseph Fux als Musiktheoretiker," Hans Albrecht in
Memoriam, ed. Wilfried Brennecke und Hans Haase (Marpurg,
1962), pp. 109-15.
104. The separate translations of the sections on species counterpoint
and on fugue(by Alfred Mann in Steps/to Parnassus and The Study
of Fugue) can give a misleading impression of the total scope of
Fux's treatise.
105. "The tone of an air ("le ton d'un Air") is the note on which it
ends; and this note is also called the final.... This final is always
the fundamental note of the air, and, so to speak, the tonic note
("la note Tonique"). Mode ("le mode") is the determination of
the course which the melody of an air should have.... It is that
which constitutes the species of each interval; it is the particular
system on which a piece of music is built" (p. 51).
106. "Von denen Tonis Choralibus, und Figuratis," pp. 106-86.
107. Tractatus musicus compositorio-practicus (Augsburg, 1745), pp.
34-36.
108. Spiess was a member of Mizler's "Korrespondierenden Sozietat
der musikalischen Wissenschaft," and was highly regarded in many
circles as a theorist and teacher. The Tractatus was listed along
with Mattheson's Der vollkommener Capellmeister, Marpurg's treatise on fugue, Heinichen's thorough-bass treatise, and other works
on composition, for a mid-18th-century music library by J. A.
Hiller. See Vincent Duckles, "Johann Adam Hiller's 'Critical Prospectus for a Music Library,"' Studies in 18th-Century Music, a
Tribute to Karl Geiringer (New York, 1970), pp. 177-85.

103

