Yale University Department of Music

A Label-Free Development for 12-Pitch-Class Systems
Author(s): David Lewin
Source: Journal of Music Theory, Vol. 21, No. 1 (Spring, 1977), pp. 29-48
Published by: Duke University Press on behalf of the Yale University Department of Music
Stable URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/843478
Accessed: 15/12/2009 12:38
Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of JSTOR's Terms and Conditions of Use, available at
http://www.jstor.org/page/info/about/policies/terms.jsp. JSTOR's Terms and Conditions of Use provides, in part, that unless
you have obtained prior permission, you may not download an entire issue of a journal or multiple copies of articles, and you
may use content in the JSTOR archive only for your personal, non-commercial use.
Please contact the publisher regarding any further use of this work. Publisher contact information may be obtained at
http://www.jstor.org/action/showPublisher?publisherCode=duke.
Each copy of any part of a JSTOR transmission must contain the same copyright notice that appears on the screen or printed
page of such transmission.
JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide range of
content in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and facilitate new forms
of scholarship. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.

Duke University Press and Yale University Department of Music are collaborating with JSTOR to digitize,
preserve and extend access to Journal of Music Theory.

http://www.jstor.org

A LABEL-FREE DEVELOPMENT
FOR 12-PITCH-CLASS

SYSTEMS

David Lewin

For some time, it has been customary in much of the important theoretical literature to label the twelve pitch-classes'
by the numbers 0 through 11. For instance, Babbitt,2Perle,3
and Forte4 all do so. The numbers involved should not strictly
be called "integers": the appropriate mathematical term is
"integers modulo 12," or better, because it avoids all possible
confusion, "residues modulo 12." An "integer" to a mathematician is an ordinary counting number: after counting to
11, one continues on to 12, 13, etc. In contrast, the residues
modulo 12 (or "mod 12") have a circular structure: if one
continues past 11, one returns to 0.
The residues mod 12 have a natural algebraic structure. It
would be out of place to develop the structure rigorously
here, but I shall outline the basic elements of its manipulation. One can add the residues m and n. Their residue sum is
that residue corresponding to their integer sum, if the latter
is less than 12. In case the integer sum is 12 or more, the residue sum is that residue corresponding to the integer sum
minus 12. Under these rules, 3 + 4 = 7, 8 + 5 = 1, 6 + 6 = 0,
etc. By analogy, "three hours clockwise and four more hours
29

clockwise gives seven hours clockwise in all; eight hours clockwise and five more hours clockwise gives one hour clockwise
in all," and so on. Residues also have negatives. Minus-zero
is zero, and for a nonzero residue n, minus-n is the residue
corresponding to the integer 12 minus n. Thus -8 = 4, -6 = 6,
etc. Again, "If I go eight hours counterclockwise, the net result will be the same as if I had gone four hours clockwise,"
and so on. One can subtract residues. The residue difference
"m minus n" is taken to be the residue sum of m and (the
residue) minus-n.
Under these conventions, many of the familiar features of
ordinary integer arithmetic carry over to residue arithmetic.
Mathematicians say that the residues mod 12 form "a group
under addition." The zero residue plays a special role in this
structure. It is singled out as the unique residue m such that
m plus n is always n itself, for any residue n. The zero residue
is also involved in the concept of negative residues. Minus-n
can be defined as precisely that residue which, together with
a given n, sums to zero. These considerations involving the
zero residue are essential and typical aspects of mathematical
group structure, as that is manifested in the present case.
The zero residue thereby enjoys a certain priority over the
others, which is formally somewhat in the nature of a "tonic"
status. For instance, why is "three o'clock" labelled with the
residue 3? Because it is three hours clockwise from "zero
o'clock" (which is of course the same as "twelve o'clock" in
this context). That is, we consider 12 o'clock a referential
hour. Each hour is labelled as "n o'clock" according to its distance clockwise from that unique referential hour.
Now it is very useful for many computational purposes to
label the twelve pc's with the residues mod 12. Nevertheless,
the practice can lead to problems in conceptualizing the exact
nature of the musical structure involved. By labelling any one
pc with the zero residue, we are implicitly (if only formally)
attributing a tonic status to that pc, in exactly the sense that
twelve o'clock enjoys a tonic status among the hours.
Forte,s for example, labels the pitch-class C with the residue zero once and for all. This leads him to a "fixed-DO"
system of pc labelling. E-flat is thereby labelled as "3" once
and for all, because it is "three hours clockwise" from the
referential C. So, even though I may hear E-flat as a musically
30

"tonic" pitch-class for Webern'sPiano Variations, I am bound
by the system to conceptualize my musical tonic as a "3"
rather than a "0." This is at least awkward and, as we shall
see, it can too easily become more than just awkward. To be
sure, one is accustomed to the specific awkwardness as typical
of the problems involved in any fixed-DO musical theory. In
France, for instance, the Eroica Symphony is conceptually
organized not about a "DO" but rather about "mi bemol,"
that is, the flatted third of some Platonic C in Heaven. But,
even in the Paris Conservatory, they do not analyze the function of the opening chord as "bIII."
Babbitt and Perle6 develop "moveable-DO" systems. The
zero residue is used to label the first pitch-class of the most
significant row-form in any specific musical context. But even
moveable-DO systems of pc labelling are still conceptually
problematic. First, does one really want to claim that in any
pertinent musical context there must be a priori one of the
pitch-classes which we shall want to analyze as functioning
referentially over all the others? That is a difficult pill to
swallow if one claims to be investigating "atonal" music,
or music composed with "twelve tones related only to one
another" and not to any one tone of reference. I pass over
the theoretical problem involved in asserting a "most significant row-form" for any serial context. Let us suppose (what
will frequently occur) that we agree on such a "tonic" rowform for some context; yet another problem arises. On what
grounds are we then to attribute a tonic function a priori to
the first pc of that row? Many subjects of tonal fugues do not
begin on the tonic degree. (The analogy is of course not exact
but is, I think, methodologically to the point.) If one wished
to label pc's for the second movement of the Piano Variations, would not the pc A be the obvious candidate for the
zero label? But no row-form used in the movement begins
with A. (Some do begin with E-flat, but these do not have the
thematic force of the opening row presentations.) The present
topic will recur later in connection with a discussion of some
aspects of Stravinsky'sIn Memoriam.
The problems we have seen arising in conceptualizing a
"zero pc," fixed or moveable, give rise to problems in conceptualizing the nature of and relations among pc inversions.
The residues mod 12 do possess one "most natural" inver31

sion: inversion about the residue 0. The twelve pitch-classes,
however, do not possess, in the raw, any one such "most
natural" inversion. There are twelve ways of inverting the
total pc chromatic into itself, and any one of these twelve inversions may assume priority in a given musical context. In
the Piano Variations, inversion about A, the same pc operation as inversion about E-flat, enjoys clear priority, among the
twelve inversions, throughout the second movement, and at
the opening and close of the third. In Schoenberg's String
Trio, inversion about B and B-flat, the same pc operation as
inversion about E and F, enjoys clear overall structural priority, considering the opening, reprise, and close of the piece.7
If I am going to label inversions for these pieces, then, I will
have a conceptually good model by labelling inversion about
E-flat as "Io" for the Webern, and inversion about E and F as
"Io" for the Schoenberg. In the former case, I can still hold
onto a moveable-DO pc labelling system, labelling the pc Eflat with the residue zero, to make the mathematics of the
labels model the musical structure. But in the latter case, I
cannot salvage the model with any moveable-DO. There is no
pc which reflects into itself under inversion about E and F,
which I might use as a zero pitch-class around which the inversion reflected things. In particular, the first pc of a row
will not work in this connection.
Going beyond such specific contexts, it seems problematical to claim that there must always be one pc inversion that
assumes priority in any pertinent musical context, which
therefore "ought" to be labelled as "Io"for that context. The
algebra of the pc labels, though, will always supply us with
exactly such an "I0," whenever we use the pc labels.
In what follows, then, I shall show that the system of transpositions and inversions on the total pc chromatic can be
developed without having to label pitch-classes.This will leave
us free to ignore labelling completely, or, given a specific
analytic context, we may adopt any one of a number of possible conventions for labelling pc's and/or inversions, depending
on that context. We will examine various possible conventions.
We will start with the unlabelled total chromatic, an unordered collection of the twelve pitch-classes, to which we shall
refer simply as C, F-sharp (= G-flat), etc. We shall also pre32

sume that we are convinced of the fundamental importance
of a construct called "the interval from s to t," where s and t
are pitch-classes. This is a function which assigns to the ordered pair s and t a value int(s,t) which is one of the residues
modulo 12. The assignment of this value will be made following the most common convention. Thus, int(C,F-sharp)
= 6, int(B-flat,D) = 4, int(D,B-flat), the intervalfrom D to Bflat = 8, int(A,G-sharp) = 11, etc. If we imagine the pitchclasses arranged in the intuitively obvious way around the
face of a clock, then int(s,t) will be the number of hours
clockwise from s to t.8
Now while the pc's themselves do not exhibit algebraic
behavior, the intervals do. Specifically, the intervals take on
values in the additive group of residues modulo 12, and the
intervals compose with one another, and have complements,
following the arithmetic of that group. The following two
formulas are all-important.
(1) For any pitch-classes s, t, and u, int(s,u) = int(s,t) +
int(t,u).
(2) For any pitch-classes s and t, int(t,s) = - int(s,t).

The plus and minus signs are to be considered modulo 12.
Formula (1) says that if you measure the interval from s to t,
and add to it, mod 12, the interval from t to u, you will end
up having measured the interval from s to u. Formula (2) says
that the interval from t to s is the mod 12 complement of the
interval from s to t. We can also think of the minus sign here
as meaning "counterclockwise": if s to t is n hours clockwise,
then t to s is n hours counterclockwise, which is -n hours
clockwise. We shall take the two formulas as established. We
shall also take as established a proposition which asserts that,
if I give you a pitch-class s and an interval n, you can find a
unique pitch-class t which is n hours clockwise from s, i.e.,
which solves the equation int(s,t) = n. For instance, if I give
you s = F-sharp and n = 9, you can produce a unique t satisfying int(F-sharp,t) = 9, namely, t = E-flat.

(3) Given any pitch-class s and any interval n, there is a
unique pitch-class t satisfying int(s,t) = n.
We can now define pc transpositions without recourse to
pc labelling. The operation "Tn," for n, a residue mod 12,
33

transforms a sample pc s into that unique pc "Tn(s)" satisfying
(4) int(s,Tn(s)) = n.

By virtue of proposition (3), given the sample s and the desired interval of transposition n, the value of "Tn(s)" is
uniquely determined by the relation (4). Notice that the subscript "n" on "Tn" is completely independent of any pc
labelling system.
We can also define inversions independent of pc labelling.
We shall do so by stipulating a pair (u,v) of pitch-classes such
that the inversion is to reflect u into v, and we shall denote
the inversion operation that does so by, "IUV."Let us consider
such an inversion: given a sample s, let us set n = int(u,s).
Since our sample s is n hours clockwise from u, the inverted
image of s will appear reflected as n hours counterclockwise
is
from v, the reflected image of u. That IUV(s) n hours counterclockwise from v can be expressed in our formalism by
writing int(v,IUv(s)) = -n. Theorem (3) assures us that one
unique pitch-class "IUv(s)"is indeed determined by the latter
equation. Substituting n = int(u,s) in the equation, we arrive
at the following characterizing equation for IUv, given pitchclasses u and v.
(5) int(v,IUV(s)) = - int(u,s) for any pitch-class s.

Via (2), we can write "int(s,u)" for "- int(u,s)" in the above
formula, obtaining an alternate characterizing equation for
IUV.

(5') int(v,IUV(s)) = int(s,u) for any pitch-class s.

This method defines "inversion taking u to v" for any possible choice of u and v. It works in particular for u = v. In this
case we will write "IU"for "IUU"and refer to "inversionabout
u." While we have a great many names for inversions, there
are only twelve distinct operations so defined, each with many
names. For instance, inversion taking C to F is the same operation as inversion taking C-sharpto E, which is the same as
inversion taking E to C-sharp, which is the same as inversion
taking D-sharp to D, etc. That is, if we pick any sample s and
compute ICF(s)via formula (5), we will obtain the same result
as we would had we computed IC-sharpE(s)via formula (5):

34

we cannot distinguish the effect of the operations on the total
Similarly, this operachromatic, so we write ICF = IC-sharpE.
=
tion = IEC-sharp ID-sharpD etc.9

In spite of the superfluity of names for inversion operations, it is not implausible to have available the resource of
conceptualizing each in so many different ways. Very frequently, the interchange of a certain u with a certain v will be
a highly prominent feature of the aural effect of an inversion
in a specific musical context. This accords with the (by no
means exact) analogy of pitch-contour inversion in tonal
counterpoint. Very often one wants to answer 1 and 5, in the
inverted form, by 5 and I respectively, the two degrees being
analogs of our present "u and v." The notion is strongly operative in measure 7 of Schoenberg's opus 23 number 3. One
hears the mezzo forte entry of the subject, inverted to begin
D-B-flat, very much in connection with the prime form that
opened the piece with B-flat-D. (There are to be sure other
significant features relating the forms.) Webern, in his serial
practice, frequently elides the last two pc's u and v of one
row form together with the first two pc's u and v of the suitably retrograde-invertedform: RIUvof the first form.
We shall defer for the moment consideration of any formal
proof that there are only twelve inversion operations; such a
proof will be indicated later. What will concern us now is a
very important and fundamental theoretical question which
is obscured when one develops a pc labelled system, but
which is presently highlighted. Among the many and various
conceivable operations one might perform on pitch-classes,
why are transpositions and inversions ones which we particularly want to investigate? The question is obscured when one
starts off from the beginning with pc labelling because the
logic of the arithmetic forces the operations, as it were, onto
the musical-theoretic structure which the arithmetic labels.
That is, we have to consider the pc operations "natural" in
that context precisely because they reflect "natural"algebraic
manipulations of the labels. But if we call into question the
conceptual validity of the labelling model, as we have, does
there remain any formal (as contrasted with historical-analytic) ground for attributing any particular conceptual significance to transpositions and inversions, as among other
possible operations on the total pc chromatic? (N.B.: we are
35

not as yet talking formally about rows; we are simply considering the unordered collection of twelve pitch-classes as a
Gestalt structured by the interval concept.) The answer is yes,
and it can be expressed in the form of a theorem.
(6) Let us say that an operation X on the total chromatic
"preserves intervals" if int(X(s),X(t)) = int(s,t) for every s
and t. Let us say that an operation Y "reversesintervals"
if int(Y(s),Y(t)) = int(t,s) (= -int(s,t)) for every s and t.
Then an operation X preservesintervals if and only if X is
a transposition; and an operation Y reverses intervals if
and only if Y is an inversion.
The theorem is proved in Appendix A. Given that we are
interested in "intervals" as structuring the total chromatic, it
is certainly natural that we will be particularly interested in
those operations which preserve or reverse intervals in the
sense of (6), and the theorem tells us that these operations
are precisely the transpositions and the inversions. In light of
the "if and only if," we could in fact have defined transpositions and inversions by those properties. The notion is suggestive in developing analogs for the system in other musical
dimensions (particularly various temporal systems). Many
finesses would be involved, however, which would lead us
beyond the scope of this paper.
Still eschewing pc labelling, one can develop formulas to
express the compositions of the operations as presently defined and notated.
(7) (a) TmTn= Tm+n (the sum modulo 12).
(b) TnIU = IU where w = Tn(v).
(c) IvTn = IUXwhere x = T_n(v).
=
(d) IUVIWX Tn where n = int(w,v) - int(u,x).

The proofs are presented in Appendix B. Thus, for example,
IB-flatA,a special case of (b). This signiwe have T5IB-flatE=
fies that given any s, the transposition by 5 of the inversion
of s via the inversion that reflects B-flat to E is the same pc as
is the inversion of s via the operation that inverts B-flat to A.
Let us study another example. Since int(F,F-sharp) - int(D,A)
= 1 - 7 = 6, we have IDF-sharp = T6 as a special case of(d).
IFA
This signifies that if you invert any s via the inversion that
reflects F to A, and then invert the result via the inversion
36

that reflects D to F-sharp, the net result will be to have trans=
posed s by a tritone. Symbolically, IDF-sharp(IFA(s)) T6(s).
From formulas (7) one can derive various standard consequences. For instance, via (b) and (c) one infers that IUTn =
=
T_nIuv. From (d), one can infer that IUVIUV To, the identity

if
operation. One can then, via (d), infer that IWX = IUV and
only if int(w,v) = int(u,x); that in turn is the case, via (2), if
and only if int(v,w) = int(x,u) which, via (5'), is the case if
and only if IUv(x)= w. From this, it can be verified that there
are exactly twelve distinct inversion operations. Their effects
on the "clock" of pitch-classes are easily visualized.10
These computations are somewhat cumbersome, compared
to the speed and efficiency of the same work using a pc
labelling model. But I feel it is very much worth while noting
that the work can be carried through without recourse to
such a model. In particular, the homogeneous group structure
of the twenty-four operations is very much highlighted in this
development. Rather than singling out one "tonic" inversion
operation, which we imagine as being followed (or preceded)
by various transpositions, to "derive" the other inversions, we
have here what is in fact the conceptual case: twelve a priori
equally "natural" inversion operations. The face of a clock
without numbers can be flipped over onto itself in twelve
equally "good" ways, just as a square can be flipped over onto
itself in four equally "good" ways-horizontally, vertically, or
about either diagonal. It is true that we may "derive" inversion J as inversion I followed by transposition T, writing J =
TI. But we can equally well "derive" I here as J followed by
T' and write I = T'J. Or for that matter, we can "derive" T as
I followed by J and write T = JI. Or we can "derive" J as T'
followed by I and write J = IT'. None of these ways of regarding the manifold interrelationships of the operations is a
priori any more or any less "natural" than any of the others.
Which of these various operations we may decide to regardas
"primary," and which as "derived," in a given context, is a
matter to be determined, if at all, by that context.
The latter observation is particularly cogent when it comes
to devising suggestive notation for the analysis of a particular
passage or piece. We can, for instance, label IBB-flat as "Io"and
thence label the twelve inversions as "In" = T,Io. This makes
conceptual sense in Schoenberg's String Trio where, if we
37

symbolize the "tonic hexachord" of the piece by "H," Tn(H)
and In(H), in the above notation, produce respectively the
hexachord and its complement transposed by n. Or we can
label IA as "Io" and then label the twelve inversions as "I" =
IoTn:(N.B. this is not the same as Tnlo!) That notation makes
conceptual sense for contexts in which whatever happens in
the pitch structure gets mirrored by inversion about A. (See
Webern,Piano Variations2nd movement, the opening section
of the Symphony, or the opening section of Boulez's Structures I.) In this notational convention, whenever Tn of a row
is dux, In of that row will be comes, and vice versa. For each
of these notational conventions, we can derive efficient algebraic formulas for combining the subscripts of the labelled
inversion operations with each other and with the transposition subscripts. The formulas will be different, depending on
the notational convention selected.
We can, in certain contexts, switch our "Io" in midstream,
letting our notation reflect an analytic assertion of "modulation" in that sense." We could, should a context warrant,
stake out an "I,," a "Jo," etc., to reflect the structuring influence of various inversions during a piece, using formulas (7)
to work out efficient algebraic translation formulas from left
or right Innotation (as per the preceding paragraph)to left or
right Jn notation, etc. In short, we are free to label (or not to
label) inversions as seems most directly suited to our analytic
conceptions in a given analytic context,'2 and this without
necessarily having labelled the pitch-classes themselves by any
fixed-DO or moveable-DO method.
Beyond such analytic considerations, the freedom afforded
by the absence of pc labelling in our model can be put to advantage in certain purely theoretical situations. For instance,
Babbitt13ponders the "sums of set numbers of a collection,"
in the sense that the differences of such set numbers (my "pc
labels") yield the intervallic content of that collection. Pointing out that the label sums also reflect important structural
features-common-note relations between the collection and
its various inverted forms, he is still concerned that the label
differences are "observational" while the label sums are not.
That is, loosely speaking, we can say that we "hear" the differences of the labels, as intervals within the collection, while
38

we cannot say that we "hear" the sums of the labels in any
similar sense, significant though they are systematically.
The methodological difficulty here can be removed by dispensing with the pc labelling that underlies the formulation
of the theoretical constructs under consideration as "sums"
and "differences" of such labels. Let us denote by "w" the
assumed moveable-DO of Babbitt's labelling system, and by
"P" the collection of pitch-classes under examination. The
numbers given by his tabulation of label sums are then, as he
recognizes, the various values of my "interval function between IW(P) and p,"'4 or equivalently, Regener's "commonnote function between P and IW(P)."15Put this way, the
question quickly arises, Why, of the various possible inverted
forms of P, is IW(P) to be singled out here a priori? Why not
consider instead the interval function between J(P) and P,
where J(P) is some other, perhaps more "natural" inverted
form of P? The latter interval function will be some cyclic
rotation of the former. Suppose, for instance, that P were an
invertible hexachord. Would not its complement be the most
"natural" inverted form to consider in this connection? But
its complement could not possibly be IW(P):the combinatorial inversion J could not leave w fixed.
In this connection, IW(P) is in fact being singled out a
priori from among the various inverted forms of P only because of the labelling model, which arbitrarilyintrojects into
the general situation a "tonic" pitch-class w, whose tonicity
is, in general, extraneous to the intervallic relations obtaining
between P and its various inverted forms. The "sums" that
appear so methodologically problematic appear so precisely
because they are extraneous to those intervallic relations, in
general: the "sums" are in the picture as such only insofar as
the various pitch classes involved are all being labelled by
their intervals from the arbitraryw. (Later work will, I hope,
clarify this perhaps too cryptic remark.)
To pursue the matter farther, let us suppose that P is an invertible hexachord with combinatorial inversion J. If "f" denotes my "interval function between J(P) and P," then the
equation "f(O) = 0" expresses the fact the J(P) and P have no
common pitch-classes. If g is the interval function between P
and itself (my "intervallic content of P," which differs slight39

ly from Forte's "interval vector"), f and g are related by the
simple formula f(n) = 6 - g(n). Thus, the more ways the interval n can appear within P, the fewer ways can it appear in
"counterpoint" between J(P) and P. Conversely, the more
ways n can appear in the "counterpoint," the fewer ways can
it appear within P. All this works strictly as per the formula.
In that the intervallic content g of P might reflect, for example, the "overall sound" of the piano part in Schoenberg's
Violin Fantasy, while the interval function f would reflect
the "overall sound" of the counterpoint between piano and
violin in that piece, the formula reflects a certain complementary aspect of those two "overall sounds" in the piece, a
matter which I find amply observational.
We can find the residue k such that IWJ= Tk. It will then
be the case that IW = TkJ. If f* is the interval function from
IW(P) to P, to which Babbitt's formulation leads us, it can
(and later will) be shown that f* is related to f by the formula
f*(n) = f(n + k) for each argument n. Using this relation, we
can pass from the observational statement "J(P) and P have
no common pitch-class" to the equivalent arithmetic statement "f(0) = 0," which now translates to a more complicated
arithmetic statement "f*(-k) = 0." The latter, in Babbitt's
development, reflects the fact that "there is no way of summing up a pair of w labels of pitch-classes within P so as to
add up to -k." It will be noted to what extent the w labels,
their sums, and the mysterious "k" here introject extraneous
and distracting factors into the theoretical situation. These
factors are not actually involved with the behavior of P and
its inverted forms at all; they are functions of the relation of
that behavior to the extraneous w labelling system. Divested
of the distracting labels, what "f*(-k) = 0" actually tells us is
that there are no intervals of -k between J(P) transposed k
semitones and P. The reason for this does not involve k nor
the "tonic" w and its labels in any essential way, but only the
relation between J(P) and P. In like manner, the straightforward formula f(n) = 6 - g(n) translates to f*(n) = 6 - g(n + k).

The "k" is again an extraneous feature to the essential situation, and the w labels pile Pelion on Ossa should we interpret
the latter equation as signifying "the number of ways we can
sum up a pair of w labels within P to a sum of n is equal to 6
40

minus the number of ways we can subtract a pair of w labels
within P to a difference of n + k." This statement is true
enough, but it is not a statement about the essential structure
of P. Rather it is a statement about the relation of that structure to the extraneous w labelling system, the mysterious "k"
arising here from the relation of the extraneous "tonic" inversion IWto the actual structuring inversion J in the situation.
The lack of "observational" character about the statement is
due precisely to the fact that it mixes in the notationally fortuitous along with the structurally essential in its arithmetic.
For another example, let P be the collection (C, C-sharp,D,
D-sharp, E), and suppose we wish to consider relations between P and its various inverted forms. Leaving aside any
specific compositional context in which P might appear, if
one wanted to attribute abstract priority to one of the twelve
inversions in connection with P, the obvious candidate is ID,
since that operation inverts P into itself. If f is the interval
function between ID(P) and P, then f is simply the intervallic
content of P (in my sense). "f(0) = 5" expresses the fact that
ID(P) has 5 common pitch-classes with P. Now suppose one
adopts the pitch-class E as a systematic DO, focussing on IE
as a notationally "tonic" inversion. If f* is the interval function between IE(P) and P, then f*(n) = f(n + 4) for each interval n. As will be shown later, this relation obtains because IE
= T4ID. Our "f(0) = 5" accordingly translates into "f*(-4)

5," attributing mysterious significance to the "4" here. The
"4," as we have just noted, actually arises from the relation of
the structurally natural inversion ID in this context to the
notationally "tonic" inversion IE = T4ID.
This, I think,'6 is the "interval of 4" to which Babbitt

refers in connection with P as a prime collection for Stravinsky's In Memoriam. That is, it arises because he attaches priority to IE rather than ID in this context. The priority of IE
in turn arises from his attaching pitch-class priority to E as a
DO for the piece, using pc labels accordingly. That choice in
turn arises from the fact that P appears in the piece in a
thematic linear ordering of which E is the first pitch-class.
This does not seem sufficient ground to me for considering E,
and IE, to have such analytic priority in the piece. For instance, the retrograde ordering is also prominent, and begins
41

with D. Furthermore, there are as good (even better, to my
ear) grounds for hearing ID as a "tonic inversion" in the music
as for so hearing IE.
Let me recapitulate somewhat. On abstract grounds, the
"interval of 4" here is only confusing. "f*(-4) = 5," divested
of the E labels, merely asserts that there are 5 intervals of -4
between ID(P) transposed by 4 and P itself. The reason for
this has nothing essential to do with "4": there are 5 intervals
of minus-anything between ID(P) transposed by that thing
and P itself. The reason has everything to do with the fact
that ID(P) = P, a fact which indicates that we ought, other
things being equal, to attribute priority to ID, not IE, in considering P.
"Other things being equal" is an important qualification. If
one wanted to assert analytic grounds for IE potency in the
piece, the relation of IE to ID would be important, the two
inversions entering into musical contention or alternation. In
that case the concomitant "interval of 4" relating the two
inversions would be analytically significant. That is a different
matter, though, from the emergence of an E "tonic" and IE
"priority" as a result of notational convention, rather than
analytic assertion.
Let me voice another caution, just to touch an obvious
base. All this is not to say that the interval of 4 has no other
special significance in the piece. It obviously does. For one
thing, it "spans" P in the obvious sense. But that makes it all
the more desirable not to confuse "real" structural 4's with
notational will-o'-the-wisp 4's.
In the Stravinsky case, the label-free structure of the situation could still be reflected by appropriate labelling, that is, if
one took D as a DO and attached notational priority thereby
to what is in fact the natural contextual inversion ID. But no
such expedient could work in the preceding case where P was
an invertible hexachord: the structurally privileged combinatorial inversion J could never be an IW, for any w one tried as
a DO.
The mathematical formalities invoked in the foregoing discussion are worked out in Appendix C.
To sum up, I have tried to show that the practice of pitchclass labelling is
42

(A) theoretically suspect, in that it implicitly asserts that
there is always one a priori "tonic" pitch-class, whether
fixed or moveable, from which we are to measure intervals to the other pitch-classes in affixing their labels.
(B) theoretically suspect, in that it leads to an implicit assertion that there is systematically one "most natural" inversion IW, rather than twelve equally plausible inversions.
(C) analytically complicating and confusing, in that even
when one wants to assert analytic contextual priority for
one of the twelve inversions J, it may be impossible to
express J in the form Iw for any w. This must be the case,
for example, for any serial piece exploiting a "tonic"
level for a combinatorially invertible hexachord.
(D) analytically restrictive, in that it can artificially exclude a
priori what may be the "best notation" in a given musical
context to reflect the structure one's analysis wants to
assert. This obtains even beyond (C) as a special case. The
practice more or less imposes one notation in advance of
analysis, rather than reflecting the richness of the group
structure of the family of transpositions and inversions,
leading to many possible contextual notations.
(E) theoretically confusing, in that the mechanics of pitchclass labelling can introduce will-o'-the-wisp intervals and
quantities (such as "sums of labels") into theoretical investigations, distracting attention from the structurally
essential to the notationally fortuitous.
and perhaps most important, (F) systematically unnecessary,
in that all the theoretical constructs one needs can be developed without the aid of pitch-class labelling along the lines of
(1) through (7) in the preceding text, together with such adjunct constructs as "interval function," which can be developed label-free. I would particularly like to recall theorem (6)
in this connection, which shows there is a formal rationale
other than the algebra of pitch-class labels to attribute particular significance to the twelve transpositions and the twelve
inversions among the many conceivable possible operations
on the total chromatic.
In distinction to points (A) through (F), it is undeniable
that pitch-class labelling can be highly useful as a computational and notational tool in many theoretical and analytic
43

contexts. I would only urge that it be recognized as just that,
so as to minimize the difficulties and fortuities to which it
can lead if allowed to assume a more central theoretical role.
APPENDIX A: proof of theorem (6)
We show that T = Tn preservesintervals: given s and t,
int(T(s),T(t)) = int(T(s),s) + int(s,t) + int(t,T(t))

via (1)

- n + int(s,t) + n

via (4)

= - int(s,T(s)) + int(s,t) + int(t,T(t)) via (2)
= int(s,t)...

as desired.

reversesintervals: given s and t,
We show that I = IUV
int(I(s),I(t)) = int(I(s),v) + int(v,I(t))

via (1)

via (2)
= - int(v,I(s)) + int(v,I(t))
via (5) and (5')
= int(u,s) + int(t,u)
= int(t,u) + int(u,s)
which, via (1)

= int(t,s)... as desired.
Now suppose that X preservesintervals. Fix an arbitraryw
and set n = int(w,X(w)). We show that X = Tn. For, given any
sample s, we have
int(s,X(s)) = int(s,w) + int(w,X(w))

+ int(X(w),X(s))

v

= int(s,w) + n + int(X(w),X(s))
= int(s,w) + n + int(w,s) since X preserves ints
= int(s,w) + n - int(s,w)
via (2)
= n.

So X(s) is the pc satisfying int(s,X(s)) = n. Via (4), we conclude that X(s) = Tn(s). This being the case for any sample s,
X=Tn.
Now suppose that Y reverses intervals. Fix an arbitrary u
and let v = Y(u). We show that Y = IUV.
For, given any sample
s, we have
substituting v = Y(u)
int(v,Y(s)) = int(Y(u),Y(s))
= int(s,u)
since Y reverses intervals.
This being
But that relation, via (5'), tells us that Y(s) = IUv(s).
Y = Iuvas an operation.
the case for any sample s,

44

APPENDIX B: proofs of formulas (7)
(a)

int(Tm +n(s),TmTn(s))= int(Tm+n(s),s)
+ int(s,TmTn(s))
- intt(,Tm+n(s))

-

+ int(s,TmTn(s))
(m + n)

+ int(s,TmTn(s))
- (m+n) +
int(s,T,,(s))
+ int(Tn(s),TmTn(s))
(m+n) + (n) +(m)

via (1)
via (4)

= 0.

Since the interval from Tm+n(s) to TmTn(s) is zero, we conclude that Tm+n(s) = TmTn(s). This being the case for any
sample,5, Tm+n = TmTn.
(b)

int(IUW(s),w)
+ int(w,TnIuv(s))

int(IuW(s),TnIUV(s))=

= - int(w,IUW(s))

+ int(w,TnIUV(s))
int(u,s) + int(w,TnIuv(s))
= int(u,s)
+ int(Tn(v),TnIUV(s)
substituting for w = T,(v)
= int(u,s) + int(v,IUV(s))
= int(u,s) - int(u,s)
=

= 0.

via (5)

via (6)
via (5)

The conclusion of the argument follows as in (a) above.
(c)

int(IuvTn(s),Iux(s)) =int(IUvTn(s),v)
+ int(v,x) + int(x,IUX(s))
= int(u,Tn(s)) + int(v,x) + int(s,u)
= int(s,u) + int(u,Tn(s)) + int(v,x)
int(s,Tn(s)) + int(v,x)
= n - n = 0.

n + int(v,jn(v))

(d)

int(Tn(s),IUvIWX(s))= int(Tn(s),s) + int(s,v)
+ int(v,IUVIWX(s))
-

n + int(s,v)
n + int(s,v)

- int(u,IWX(s))
- int(u,x)

- int(x,IWX(s))

45

=- n + int(s,v) - int(u,x) + int(w,s)
=- n - int(u,x) + int(w,s) + int(s,v)
=- n - int(u,x) + int(w,v)
=0.

APPENDIX C: on the "sums of set numbers" of a collection;
mathematical formalities.
Let P be a collection of pitch-classes and w a "tonic" pc.
We shall write "wlabel(s)" for int(w,s). (The labelling system
labels the pitch-class s according to its intervallic distance
from the "tonic" w.) For any pair of pitch-classes s and t, we
compute
via definition
wlabel(s) + wlabel(t) = int(w,s) + int(w,t)
= int(IW(s),w)+ int(w,t) via (5) and (2)
= int(IW(s),t)

via (1).

Now if f* is the interval function from IW(P)to P, f*(n) is
the number of ways in which the interval n can be spanned
from IW(P)to P, which is the number of pairs (s,t) of members of P such that int(IW(s)t)= n. Via the preceding computation, this is the number of such pairs whose wlabels sum to
n. The notion of "summing" appears only because, in the
above computation, the actual interval of interest, int(IW(s),t),
is broken down by the labelling convention into the sum
int(w,s) + int(w,t). That is an aspect of the structure of the
labelling convention itself, not of P and its various inversions.
If Iw is the inversion in which we are most interested, contemplating P, well and good. If there is some other inversion J
to which we wish to assign systematic or contextual analytic
priority, then we will be interested in f(n), the number of
ways in which the interval of n can be spanned between J(P)
and P; this more than in f*. Setting IWJ= Tk, via (7(d)), we
will have IW= TkJ;then, continuing the earlier computation,
int(IW(s),t) = int(TkJ(s),t)
via (1)
= int(TkJ(s),J(s)) + int(J(s),t)
= int(J(s),t) + int(TkJ(s),J(s))
= int(J(s),t) - k

via (4) and (2).

Thus, whenever f* tabulates an interval of n = int(IW(s),t), f
will tabulate an interval of n + k = int(J(s),t), and vice versa.

46

So f*(n) = f(n + k). Or, equivalently, f(n) = f*(n - k). The two

interval functions are cyclic rotations, each of the other. And
it is f(n) in which we are really interested.
Without involving w or k at all, we can describe f(n) simply
as the number of ways of spanning an interval of n from J(P)
to P. Working the computations backwards, we may, if we
wish, also express f(n) as the number of ways one can add
wlabels from P in pairs to sum up to (n - k). The latter formulation, however, involves not just the "natural" structure of P
itself as we wish to consider it in the given context, but that
structure in relation to an extraneously presumed "tonic" w,
and the "tonic" IWin relation to the actually significant J.
NOTES
1. Hereafter I shall abbreviate "pitch-class" by "pc" ad libitum.
2. Milton Babbitt, "Set Structure as a Compositional Determinant,"
Journal of Music Theory 5(1961): 72-94. The article is reprinted in
Perspectives on Contemporary Music Theory, edited by Benjamin
Boretz and Edward T. Cone (New York: W. W. Norton, 1972).
3. George Perle, Serial Composition and Atonality (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1962).
4. Allen Forte, The Structure of Atonal Music (New Haven: Yale University Press, 1973).
5. Ibid.
6. Babbitt, "Set Structure," and Perle, Serial Composition.
7. Such matters are expounded at length in an earlier article of mine,
"Inversional Balance as an Organizing Force in Schoenberg's Music
and Thought," Perspectives of New Music 6(1968): 1-21.
8. The functionality of this concept arises from the following fact: if
p and q are any pitches which belong to pitch-classes s and t respectively, and if N is the number of semitones up from p to q (= 0 if
p = q; negative if q is lower than p), then the residue of N mod 12
will always be int(s,t) no matter in what registers the pitches p and
q lie. Thus, "int(C,F) = 5" reflects the fact that the interval, in
semitones up, between any pitch whose name is C and any pitch
whose name is F will always be some multiple of 12 semitones, plus
5. For instance, middle C to Queen of the Night F is 29 semitones;
29 = (2.12) + 5. High C to contra F is -55 semitones; -55 =

((-5)-12)+ 5.

It should be stressed that this notion of pitch interval, and hence
the pc interval it induces, is completely independent of any fixed
or moveable DO one might consider, whether on metaphysical
grounds, analytic-contextual, or for purposes of tuning.

47

9. The second movement of the Piano Variations illustrates clearly to
the ear that IA = IB-flatG-sharp= IBG = ICF-sharp = IDE = IE-flat = IED
= IFC-sharp= IF-sharpC= IGB = IG-sharpB-flat The String Trio, particu-

larly measures 1, 41-44, 1071/2-109/2, and the analogous portions
=
of the reprise, does as much for IBB-flat= ICA = IC-sharpG-sharp
IDG = iD-sharpF-sharp = IEF = IFE = IF-sharpD-sharp = IGD =

= IAC = IB-flatB
IG-sharpC-sharp
10. See the early diagrams of Lewin, "Inversional Balance."
1 1. See my observations on the two powerful inversions in Die Kreuze,
ibid.
12. Each such labelling system corresponds mathematically to a partition of the group of pc operations under discussion: into the family
of left or right cosets of a certain contextually privileged subgroup.
13. Milton Babbitt, "The Structure and Function of Musical Theory:
I," College Music Symposium 5(1965): 49-60. The article is reprinted in Perspectives on Contemporary Music Theory.
14. David Lewin, "Intervallic Relations between two Collections of
Notes," Journal of Music Theory 3(1959): 298-301.
15. Eric Regener, "On Allen Forte's Theory of Chords," Perspectives
of Music Theory 13(1974): 191-212.
16. The words "I think" arise from incertitude on my part over Babbitt's exact procedure, since he does not actually cite any form of
P, ordered or unordered, nor does he indicate specifically which
pitch-class he is assuming as a contextual "tonic" zero. My guess is
that he followed the procedure I am about to outline. In that case,
his "interval of 4" is a mistake for "interval of 8" (which is -4).
Taking E as a zero pitch-class, and considering my cited form of P
as E labelled, there will be 5 ways of summing pairs of E labels
within P to a sum of 8. It is also possible (but I think not as likely)
that, given the cited form of P, he is taking C as the "tonic" zero
pitch-class rather than E. In that case, the "interval of 4" comes
out right as such. Whatever his procedure, the sense of my following critique applies.

48

