Substructure Discovery of Symbolic Musical Information using the Minimum
Description Length Principle
Tang-Chun Li
Faculty of Music, McGill University
555 Sherbrooke Street West, Montreal, H3A 1E3, Canada
litc@music.mcgill.ca
Abstract
This paper presents a model for discovery and organization of recurring patterns and substructures in a music
piece based on the Minimum Description Length principle. It describes a new system of how to encode,
match, and organize a large symbolic musical sequence for patterns and substructures searching in machine
recognition of music and music database.
1. Introduction and Related Works
Music content-based retrieval and machine recognition of music share the same difficulty in organizing and matching
musical substructures in a systematic way. Some current content-based retrieval systems are limited to only certain
types of music and assume availability of many meta-events types of information. (Chou et. al., 1996) Recent
research on machine recognition of music shows that patterns are one of the key elements to the understanding of
music. (Simon and Sumner, 1968; McAdams, 1989; Rowe, 1993) Previous research emphasized on induction and
recognition of short melodic fragments or motives. (Rowe, 1993; Stammen & Pennycook, 1993; Bakhmutova et.
al., 1997) Although these are useful techniques for comparing new input with stored segments, it is not very
efficient for representation, organization, and comparison of works in a database. This is because structural
organization at the level of the whole piece was not addressed. This paper describes an alternative top-down matching
method that reduces the storage size and matching time. Particularly, we emphasize on the preprocessing of input
sequence to discover substructures. Later we will show that this preprocessing is also a sequence matching process.
The result is a compressed representation that is easy to search at various levels.
This on-going research project is based on earlier work on music pattern processing and melodic fragments
matching of Pennycook et. al. (1993), Rowe (1993), Stammen & Pennycook (1993), Rowe & Li (1994) and others.
In this system, we only deal with symbolic music data that is equivalent to the note concept. An ideal input data
format would be the direct translation of a notated score into a MIDI stream played in real-time. This means three
things: (1) meta-events information such as tempo, time signature, key signature and others is not required; (2) this
system should be able to deal with real-time situation, currently not implemented; (3) normalization including
quantization and time shifting is required for real life data.
2. Music Communication and Minimum Description Length Principle
Many theories about music describe a reduction process of internal representation during the listening or analyzing
stage. Examples are the Western tonal music theory, the Schenkerian analysis, Lerdahl and Jackendoff (1983), and
Bingand (1993). In our view, this reduction process can be viewed as a music communication problem. Music
communication can be considered as an information communication between a sender and a receiver. The goal is to
communicate the structural/syntactic and possibly the semantic information. Assuming only auditory information is
available, the complexity of the notes to notes details usually is too high for a listener to cognize. The listener has
to engage a parsing system to create an internal structure that is within his maximum manageable complexity or
abandons the communication. The best communication then is defined as the one that can describe the observed
sequences with the shortest length. The above definition logically follows several independent works in serial pattern
research (Simon, 1972; Leeuwenberg, 1971; van der Helm et. al. 1991) and in computational science (Rissanen,
1989; Li & Vitanyi, 1997). In his study of complexity of serial pattern processing, Simon concludes that the
complexity of a sequence is the code length. Meanwhile, Leeuwenberg adopts the minimum principle (Hochberg &
McAlister, 1953) which states that the preferred interpretation of a pattern is the simplest description of that pattern.
The minimum principle is consistent with the Gestalt Psychology.
Our system adopts Rissanen's theory (1989) of the Minimum Description Length (MDL) principle. The
MDL principle says that the best theory to explain a data set is the theory that has the shortest description. This
shortest description includes the length of the theory that explains the observed data, plus the length to encode the
data according to the theory.
Note that when we apply the MDL principle to a musical sequence, there are two levels of encoding. The
first level, or the basic encoding, encodes the musical sequence into a preferable processing format for the MDL
principle. The basic encoding is determined by the musical knowledge equipped within the system. A system with
domain knowledge will perform better than a system without. The second level is the recursive substructure

discovery due to the MDL principle directly. Music knowledge can also be used to assist the MDL matching to
induce high-level substructures. In this paper, we focus on the second level of encoding and assume that we have the
same musical knowledge for all input pieces.
3. System Overview
The following assumptions are adopted for the systemÕs operations: (1) The input music itself is a congruent entity
in which the progression should be consistent within itself. (2) Input sequence consists at least the notes
information. Meta-events information is assumed to be unavailable. (3) All values of any parameters used in the
basic encoding are within a fixed range. For example, all intervals fall into the range of {-24, 24}.
There are three types of databases for patterns and segments separately. All symbols used at the level of the
basic encoding are simple (or terminal) symbols. Any new symbol corresponding to a pattern is a compound (or
nonterminal) symbol. Patterns or segments in the basic database consist of only simple symbols. In the mixed
database they consist of both simple and compound symbols. In the symbol database they consist of only compound
symbols. Patterns in databases are linked to their direct superset patterns or segments.
The system operates in three stages. In the normalization and basic encoding stage, the input sequence is
normalized, segmented, separated, and encoded into a vector or a matrix of symbols. Normalization refers to the
quantization of note duration and time shifting to synchronize with time unit grid. Related research is discussed in
(Desain and Honing, 1994). Here we adopt the approach in (Pennycook et. al., 1993). Segmentation at this stage is
based on gaps of rest(s). A further refinement is in next stage. Pattern matching and searching starts sequences for
one instrument first. When many channels are squeezed into one track (such as MIDI file Format 0), a separation
task is required. Finally, each segment is encoded as a string of unique symbols. These symbols correspond to the
intervals and other tokens in the segment.
In the next segment induction stage, each segment is divided into finer segments by applying a revised
version of the Segmenter algorithm implemented in (Pennycook et. al., 1993). This program also follows the
Grouping Preference Rules in (Lerdahl and Jackendoff, 1983).
The last stage is the preprocess-match stage. While preprocessing the input sequence, the program also
searches for all potential patterns. It can split into two steps: (1) match and substitute with the pattern and segment
databases; (2) scan segment for internal patterns at last. The program first matches patterns in the basic database,
then stores or substitutes them as new or previously stored symbol. When an existing pattern is found, it then
matches with the direct superset patterns/segments until either a match is found or all patterns/segments are
exhausted. If a pattern is found, then this new segment is replaced by the symbol of the pattern. If a segment is
found, then this segment is registered as a pattern and assigned a symbol. After matching with the database, the
program scans the input segment for its internal patterns. Eventually, if the program finds nothing, the segment is
registered as a segment in one of the three segment databases.
When the preprocessings for all instrumental lines (in horizontal direction) are done, then a vertical
grouping and substructure discovery is applied. Vertical grouping is determined by synchronized root notes of
segments in all lines. Groups created by the vertical grouping are called basic groups. Each basic group is considered
an atomic unit. Member segments from different lines in a basic group are overlapping with each other. For this
reason, matching among basic groups is to compare them in entirety. The final output is a maximally compressed
network (or tilted tree) of symbols.
After the preprocessing of all pieces in the database, any two musical works in the database can be compared
in a top-down manner. Lower level symbols are compared only when necessary.
4. Minimum Description Length Encoding of a Music Segment
The system encodes the following basic information: channel, pitch, velocity, duration, start time, and end time. All
other information is inferred from the input data. Meta-events information is not used.
Principles of encoding: (1) P1. Prefer no information lost during the encoding unless P2. (2) P2. When one
object is identified cognitively as the same as another object even though they are not entirely the same, we can
substitute one with the other.
Since the encoded sequence will be used to represent the symbolic sequence of a musical input such as a
MIDI file, information should be preserved as much as possible so that a cognitively equivalent version of the
original can be restored. For example, a live performance piece in MIDI stream will lose some of the timing
information after the basic encoding process, but the restored one should be equivalent to the version notated in the
score.
Encoding rules for a monophonic line: (1) R1. An alphabet of unique symbols is used to encode all values
in all parameters. Each symbol has a constant cost, u bits in length. These symbols have precedence relations.
However, only those that are used to encode melodic intervals and velocity parameters will use their precedence
relations. We can think of them as positive and negative integers. (2) R2. The start note of the piece has a relative

pitch 0 with its original velocity. The root note of a segment has a relative pitch equal to the interval between itself
and the start note. Only root notes of segments have pitch information. (3) R3. All segments are encoded as a vector
of intervals except the root note, which use a special root symbol. (4) R4. Velocity vector is encoded by velocity
differences. Directional information of dynamic change is embedded in the difference values. (5) R5. Timing
information is preserved in the vector as the index.
For the encoding of a polyphonic line, replace all vectors as matrices. (6) R6. The lowest notes at each time
unit form a bass line. This bass line is stored as an interval vector. Music notes that are vertically above any notes
in the bass line are represented by its interval from the bass note. If there is no note above, fill in a rest symbol.
Note that in our system the velocity information is only used to assist the decision making of the pattern
matching of the melodic patterns. Interval and duration serve the main roles.
Example: Fugue 2 in C minor, BWV 847: (1) score; (2) basic encoding with segmentation info; (3) input string for the
pattern matching and substructure discovery.

(1)

(2)

(3)

According to the MDL principle, the theory that best supports a data set is the one that minimizes the Description
Length, DL( DB, P) = L( P) + L( DB | P) , or, simply L( DB) , where P is the patterns discovered, DB is all the
music sequences in the system, L(P) is the number of bits required to encode all the patterns, and L( DB | P) is the
number of bits needed to encode all the sequences. In brief, as long as the basic encoding scheme is set, the best
theory should the one that picks the patterns those minimize the length. Next we will prove that our system always
minimize the description length when a new input sequence has been added into our database.
Definition: A local minimum is defined as the pattern set that matched with the segment and minimizes the
description length of the DB ∪ s , where s is the segment. The occurrences of the new pattern can be associated
with the previous pattern(s) as: (1) independent, (2) linked component, (3) subpattern, (4) superset. We call these the
relations between patterns. Let T be a set of sequences; F(T , s) is the function to evaluate the description cost after
the processing of s .
Theorem 1. Any newfound pattern will either decrease or maintain the current description length. If the pattern is
longer than two or occurs more two times, the description length will decrease.
Proof. Let l be the total length of sequences. X is a pattern of length k and occurs m times in the sequences,
including the local segment. The encoding length of the sequences before the pattern processing is L = lu. The new
coding length is L ′ = (l − mk)u + mu + ku = (l + 1 + (1 − k)(m − 1)) * u.
Since by definition, k ≥ 2 and m ≥ 2 , so L ′ ≤ lu = L . When k > 3 or m > 3 , L© L .
<
###
Lemma 1. The coding length evaluation function F is order independent for independent patterns.
Lemma 2. The coding length evaluation function F is order independent for linked related patterns.
Lemma 3. The coding length evaluation function F is order independent for subset-superset related patterns.
Theorem 2. Many different pattern sets are available for interpreting the input sequence s. Let Ps be the set of new
patterns found in s and DB that will lead to the shortest description for (DB, s). Then Ps is the union of the patterns
that reach the local minimum in each segment or substructure.
Because of the limited space, we leave the proof to the readers.

5.
Discussions
Substructure Discovery: Regardless its length, any pattern in the system is assigned a symbol. Our assumption is
that the amount of symbols is not large. However, when the database is large, the assumption of constant cost of
symbol is no longer true. Since symbols required for the basic encoding is much less, a better system is to have a
small, constant cost of symbols used for the basic encoding, and a separate symbol set for patterns. Another question
we haven't addressed in this paper is the similarity measurement between two large substructures or sequences.
Further investigations are required. Matching and inexact matching: The current version of the inexact matching is
done by the dynamic programming as in the (Stammen and Pennycook, 1993) Currently it only applies to onedimensional matching. We examine sequences by three methods: self-matching, repeated symbols, and matching
with others. Limitations of the current basic encoding program: for certain types of input sequence, the current
version of basic encoding program does not encode correctly. This is caused by at least two factors: in live
performance piece the performer often changes tempo and plays early or later then what is notated in the score;
another is the expressional nature of MIDI sequence. It only records the actions of performer, not the actual sound
played by the MIDI instruments. Since each sampled instrument has its own envelope, the recorded MIDI sequence
might not match with what is notated on the score.
6. Domain Knowledge and Conclusion
In this paper, a pilot system for substructure discovery of symbolic musical data based on the Minimum Description
Length principle is discussed. The resulting encoding/representation of musical data can be used for machine
recognition of music and content-based retrieval in music database. Specifically, we consider a music communication
situation where the goal is to communicate the structural/syntactic and possibly the semantic information. The MDL
principle provides a good theory for implementing a system of such a communication nature. We also describe the
matching process of the system, its encoding scheme, and the representations of the sequences. Some limitations and
problems are also discussed. Finally, although the system is data-driven than rules-driven as in many intelligent
music systems, specific domain knowledge could be incorporated into the system for inference. A future version will
include more music knowledge to improve both the basic encoding and the normalization.
References
Bakhmutova, I. V., V. D. Gusev, T. N. Titkova. 1997. The search for adaptations in song melodies. Computer
Music Journal, 21(1), 58-69.
Bigand, E. 1993. Contributions of music to research on human auditory. In Thinking In Sound: The Cognitive
Psychology of Human Audition, ed. S. McAdams and E. Bigand, Clarendon Press, Paris.
Chou, Ta-Chun, Arbee L.P. Chen, and C.-C. Liu. 1996. Music databases: indexing techniques and implementation.
In Proceedings of the International Workshop on Multi-Media Database.
Desain, P., & Honing, H. 1994. From foot tapper systems to beat induction models. Proceedings ICMPC. Liege:
ESCOM.
Hochberg, J. E., and E. McAlister. 1953. A quantitative approach to figural goodness. Journal of Experimental
Psychology, 46, 361-364.
Lerdahl, F., and R. Jackendoff. 1983. A Generative Theory of Tonal Music. Cambridge: MA: MIT Press.
Leeuwenberg, E. L. J. 1971. A perceptual coding language for visual and auditory patterns. American Journal of
Psychology, 84(3), 307-349.
Li, Ming, and P. Vitanyi. 1997. An Introduction to Kolmogorov Complexity and Its Applications. 2nd. Ed. New
York: Springer.
McAdams, S. 1987. Music: a science of the mind? Contemporary Music Review, 2, 1-61.
Pennycook, B., D. Stammen, and D. Reynolds. 1993. Toward a Computer Model of a Jazz Improviser. In
Proceedings: 1993 International Computer Music Conference.
Rissanen, J. 1989. Stochastic Complexity in Statistical Inquiry. Singapore: World Scientific.
Rowe, R. 1993. Interactive Music System. Cambridge, Mass: MIT Press.
Rowe, R., and T.C. Li. 1994. Pattern processing in music. In Proceedings: 1994 International
Stammen, D., and B. Pennycook, 1993, Real-time Recognition of Melodic Fragments Using the Dynamic
Timewarp Algorithm. In Proceedings: 1993 International Computer Music Conference.
Simon, H. A. 1972. Complexity and the representation of patterned sequences of symbols. Psychological Review,
79(5), 369-382.
Simon, H., and Richard Sumner. 1969. Pattern in Music, from Formal Representation of Human Judgment, pp.
219-251.
van der Helm, Peter A, Rob J van Lier, and Emanuel J Leeuwenberg. 1992. Serial pattern complexity: irregularity
and hierarchy. Perception, 1992, vol. 21, pp. 517-544.

