Yale University Department of Music

Ideas for a Study "On the Imagination of Tone"
Author(s): Hugo Riemann
Source: Journal of Music Theory, Vol. 36, No. 1 (Spring, 1992), pp. 81-117
Published by: Duke University Press on behalf of the Yale University Department of Music
Stable URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/843911
Accessed: 16/12/2009 05:31
Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of JSTOR's Terms and Conditions of Use, available at
http://www.jstor.org/page/info/about/policies/terms.jsp. JSTOR's Terms and Conditions of Use provides, in part, that unless
you have obtained prior permission, you may not download an entire issue of a journal or multiple copies of articles, and you
may use content in the JSTOR archive only for your personal, non-commercial use.
Please contact the publisher regarding any further use of this work. Publisher contact information may be obtained at
http://www.jstor.org/action/showPublisher?publisherCode=duke.
Each copy of any part of a JSTOR transmission must contain the same copyright notice that appears on the screen or printed
page of such transmission.
JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide range of
content in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and facilitate new forms
of scholarship. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.

Duke University Press and Yale University Department of Music are collaborating with JSTOR to digitize,
preserve and extend access to Journal of Music Theory.

http://www.jstor.org

IDEAS FOR A STUDY "ON THE
IMAGINATION OF TONE"

Hugo Riemann
I.
Tones, Their Sensation and Conception
A guiding principle that extends throughout my music-theoretic
and music-aestheticwork from the time of my dissertation (Musikalische Logik, Leipzig, C. F. Kahnt, 1873)1is that music listening is not
merely a passive processing of sound effects in the ear but, on the contrary, a highly developed manifestation of the logical functions of the
human intellect. Without being absolutely clear myself of that which
I really sought and to which I aspired, I have gradually developed a
kind of musical grammarin my new system of notation for harmony
("Skizzeeiner neuen Methode der Harmonielehre,"[Leipzig] 1880) in
its various stages of development up to the formulationof the "Lehre
von den tonalen Funktionen der Harmonie" ("Vereinfachte Harmonielehre," 1893), and likewise in the labelling of rhythmicelements
in music (phrase markings) from the very first articles to raise the
question in "MusikalischesWochenblatt" (1882)2 up to the formulation of a "System der musikalischenRhythmik und Metrik" (1904).3
In the harmonic concepts tonic, dominant, subdominant, and the
rhythmic concepts "heavy and light beats," "heavy and light measures," "antecedent, consequent," etc., this grammar points to the
81

elements over which musical logic governs, and teaches their manipulation in order to build musicalphrases in the same way that a spoken
grammardoes with the concepts "subject," "predicate," etc. In retrospect, I do not consider it an error that I have not chosen the path
"from bottom to top," the "inductive method," but rather the path
from top to bottom, the "deductivemethod"-that is, that I have consciously placed myself in the position of contemporary artistic practice, taking full advantageof its resources, and have sought to find and
to comprehend these elements from its point of view. The immense
difficulties against which the opposing method strives have been set
forth clearly enough in the work of Carl Stumpf, whose Tonpsychologie (Volume 1-2, 1883-1890 [Leipzig]) awakened the boldest hopes
of a satisfactorysolution to the problem of hearing music through surmounting the deficiencies in Helmholtz's "Lehre von den Tonempfindungen" ([Brunswick] 1863). All too soon, however, it brought
disappointment, since the author himself abandoned the work's continuation and became bogged down in the detail-work of preliminary
tone-psychological investigations of intervals. The hope that Stumpf
would transport the foundation of music theory from a physiological
to a psychological domain has not been fulfilled, and music listening
still appears as a physical process in Stumpf, even more so than in
Helmholtz. The "logicalactivity"of musical hearing, which I had postulated already in 1873, plays no role in his work.
I too have only very slowly reached an understandingof the reasons
why the obstacles created by useless findings in physical and physiological investigationsof sounding phenomena have been almost insurmountable in moving toward aesthetic observations on the structure
of living music. Traces of budding knowledge can be found in my article "Spontane Phantasietatigkeitund verstandmassigeArbeit in der
tonkiinsterlischen Produktion" in the 1909 Jahrbuch der Musikbibliothek Peters [Leipzig, pp. 33-46] and in the third volume of my
"Kompositionslehre"
(1913).4 To put it brieflyand without digression:
my intensive preoccupation with "late Beethoven" while revising
Thayer's five-volume Beethoven biography5 first opened my eyes
completely and even allowed me to formulate a statement that the
hearer of my lectures might have received at first with some astonishment: the "Alphaand Omega" of musical artistryis not found in the
actual, sounding music, but ratherexists in the mentalimage of musical
relationshipsthat occurs in the creative artist's imagination-a mental
image that lives before it is transformedinto notation and re-emergesin
the imagination of the hearer. The process of notating an artisticcreation as well as the sounding performance of the work are merely expedients to transplant musical experiences from the composer's
imagination into the imagination of the musical listener. If one has
82

grasped these fundamental ideas, then it is clear that the inductive
method of tone-physiologyand tone-psychologyis headed in the wrong
directionfrom the very beginningwhen it takesas its point of departure
the investigationof the elements of sounding music, instead of the examination of the elements of music as it is imagined. In other words:
neitheracoustics, nor tone-physiologynor tone-psychologycan give the
key to the innermost essence of music, but rather only a "Theoryof
Tonal Imagination"-a theory which, to be sure, has yet to be postulated, much less developed and completed.
In all fairness, I should not be expected to present a wellarticulated structure for this new discipline all at once. For the time
being, it is only a matter of the very first emphatic assertion of the
postulate. It is clear, however, that it is truly a "theory of tonal imagination" to which Helmholtz aspired and that Stumpf seemed to
achieve with his tone-psychology. That my own theoretical works up
until now were nothing other than building blocks, contributions toward the creation of such a theory, is not doubtful to me in the least.
Meanwhile, there is certainly much to be done in the new field, and
the theory's completion will probably have to occupy musical scholarshipfor a long time. Even the definitionof the concept and the question of its necessity await, for many, first proofs and interpretation.
Therefore it must be my initial task to state, for the first time, what a
significantrole the imagination of tones and of tonal motion plays-a
role it has played, and will continue to play, in music-makingfor all
time.
Just as a painter, in advance, gazes inwardlyupon a picture that he
wishes to paint, so does a composer hear inwardly and in advance all
that he notates afterwards.I refer to my article in the 1909 yearbook,
which endeavors to elicit the correct understanding of Beethoven's
"sketchbooks"and to bring to consciousness their sense and meaning,
which is that a work may well have a latent existence for years in the
imaginationof the artist and can grow and evolve before it receives its
definitive formulation and final version by being written down. Every
musical composition that even the non-composing musician knows by
heart and is capable of reproducingin his memory at any time has an
analogous existence in his imagination. It must be admitted that these
images can be of quite different intensity in [different] musical imaginations. This at least is certain, that in the case of intensive musical
temperaments,all the attributesof actually sounding music obtain, including the most subtle distinctions of timbre and also the strongest
dynamic effects. Best-known and familiar even to non-musiciansare
the agonies that any popular song can cause by persistent reappearance in the memory. It is not entirely superfluous to note that each
singer or player who reproduces a musical composition from the
83

notated music, or from memory, imagines each tone firstbefore bringing it forth, and that the distress over an error in intonation or wrong
note is explained chiefly through the conflict of the sounding note
against the expected (imagined) one. That we are able to recognize
and find fault with incorrect intonation in a work heard for the first
time, which until then has been unknown to us, demands a somewhat
more involved explanation. Here it is a matter of progressionsof notes
that strike us as illogical, unnaturalor impossible-that is, once again,
contradictionsbetween something expected and something offered in
its place, between what is imagined and what is actually heard.
Without a doubt, musical training, comprehensive knowledge of
the literature, and practice are able to increase and develop considerably this capacity to hasten forwardwith the imagination, ahead of
the actual sounding notes. The difficulty in understanding a more
complexly worked-out modern composition on first hearing results, to
be sure, from the fact that to a high degree it is necessary to grasp the
entire course of the work through apperception of the individual
sounding tones. The reading along with the score of a work as it is
heard for the first time, which the unknowledgeable dismiss with a
shrug of the shoulders, is not a mere crutch for the understanding.
This activity enables the trained musician, at least, to bring the music
that follows to life ahead of time in his imagination, from the notation,
so that the individual apperception of the sounding notes is unnecessary; rather, the individual notes are grouped into living structures
that are united with what has gone before. It is an open question, however, whether all of those who sit in concerts with the score really have
the capacity to draw the anticipated benefit therefrom-that is,
whether many do not feign a degree of classical education, one which
they in no way actually possess.
Anyone who has ever turned pages for a performing artist knows
that his eyes are always a long way ahead of the immediatelysounding
notes, so that he is continuously reading and imaginingsomething different and beyond while performingthat which came before. It is one
of the great wonders of human capacity that this is at all possible.
What is more, doing so will in no way encroach upon the performer's
capability to control the immediately-soundingnotes with regard to
their correctness. Likewise, he who reads along with a score at a concert is always some distance ahead with his eyes, bringing to life musical structuresthat will only follow later those that are sounding at the
time. The expression "readingalong" is absolutely false; it is much
more a matter of a continuous "readingahead."
That our musicpedagogy will be capable of making a highly meaningful step forward through conscious inclusion of the musical imagination in schooling by means of rational, methodical training of the
84

faculties is a certainty. This trainingwill result in an
tonal-imaginative
entirely new instruction, especially for the elementary teaching of
singing, because relevant exercises are nothing other than training in
the most precise imaginingof the individualintonations. The first preliminary question for the establishment of the theory must therefore
be: Whatdo we really imagine? What are the discerniblefeatures that
an imagined note has in common with an actual sounding one, if it is
imagined correctly?
Of course, everythingwill depend upon our keeping firmlyin mind
the guiding principle that distinguishesthe aspiringnew theory-that
is, that from the very start and from then on we investigate the active
imagination, the images of tone, and that we seek to ascertain which
categoriesof thoughtguide and determine the living, working musical
imagination, and which categories impose rules upon it.
The first object for our consideration is obviously not the artistically uninteresting individual note of any single musical instrument,
but rather the note as a component of a musical work of art. It is
quickly discernible that the individual note's characteristics,in whatever musical context, are by no means exhausted by determinationof
the note's absolutepitch height. On the contrary, these features occasion an entire set of diverse categories for the individual note, each
with its own specific definition.
At one time, I was opposed to Dr. Geza Revesz*6 (Zeitschriftder
InternationalMusikgesellschaftXIII, 8 and XIV, 5 and 6) when he
proposed a double definition for the designation of pitch height and
advanced the concept of "harmonicrelatability" as something separate from absolute pitch height.7Today I see that I misunderstoodDr.
Revesz, although not entirely through my own fault since it did not
emerge from his explanation that he was thinking of something other
than actual sounding notes. But if one proceeds from the perspective
of the mental image of sound, then Dr. Revesz's hypothesis suddenly
seems entirely different. To be sure, I do not need to take back anything from all that I have written against Revesz; but I am pleased
that, througha modificationof the point of view, I believe I have come
to an understandingof that which he posited-what Revesz had in
mind, even if it was not stated clearly enough. Revesz's assertations
are good and correct, as soon as one transfersthem into the sphere of
the musical imagination. Essentially, the harmonic relatedness (not
*G. Rdevsz, "Nachweisung dass in der sogenannten Tonhohe zwei von einander
unabhangige Eigenschaften zu unterscheiden sind" ["Demonstration that two characteristics that are independent of one another are to be distinguished in the socalled pitch height"], (Nachrichten der Gottinger Gesellschaft der Wissenschaften,
mathematisch-physikalische Klasse 1912).

85

"relatability")-the representation of a tonal complex [Klangvertretung]-is a principal distinguishing feature of each concrete,
note. According to whether a note is imagined as 1, 3,
musically-heard
or 5 of a major chord or as I, III or V of a minor chord, it is something
essentially different and has an entirely different expressive value,
character and content. For the expressive value, character, and content of the harmony that it represents associates it with an aesthetic
value. If, for now, we ignore the meaning that a note can have as a
dissonant addition to a harmony, which disturbs its consonance, the
six-fold possibility for the representation of the tone "a" is as shown
in Example 1.
One of the first, most basic exercises of the faculties of musical
imagination would have to be to imagine specifically each individual
note in its six possibilities for the representationof a tonal complex.
This exercise can be undertaken methodically such that from a given
chord (major or minor) the student will extract and intone the 1, 3, 5
(I, III, V), or even (which is considerably more difficult) such that a
single assigned note will be filled out into a triad by the student by
adding the two other notes (see Example 2). If a certain fluency and
sureness are achieved in this realizationof a complete harmony, then,
no doubt, this will also guarantee the capability of appreciating the
individual note precisely in each of the six aesthetic meanings. The
question whether an isolated tone, for example at the beginning of a
composition, will be appreciated as a truly individual note (without
harmonic meaning as representative of a tonal complex) cannot
readily be answered with "yes"or "no"without more information. So
long as the composition in question is completely unknown to the listener, some doubt as to how he is to interpret the tone must be admitted as a possibility. However, the key signature and knowledge of
the key of the piece in general already remove this uncertainty to a
great extent, and perhaps also the inclination to understandthe note
as root of a major chord, where all other clues are missing. Even a
tone that occurs in the middle of a piece, if it is strongly foreign to the
preceding harmony, can effect a kind of riddle, the solution to which
is found only in the continuation (Ph.E. Bach, Haydn, Mozart and
Beethoven have often achieved particularly fascinating results with
such musical riddles). In such cases one is able, with good reason, to
regardthe multiple relatabilityof the individualnote at the moment of
its entrance as a complex formation related to dissonance, the striking
impression of which, of course, decreases strongly on closer acquaintance with the work. Simultaneitiesof two tones (intervals) also have
yet another, although more limited, polyvalence [Mehrdeutbarkeit]
first of all, as a (consonant) dual-representation
from the same harmony (only two possibilities for each interval) as shown in Example 3,
86

I

3

5

1

A
-A

V

H I ?e I X I
in:

f+

d+

a+

IIl

1
I
?a

1"1
?e

?c#

Example 1

1

3

5

5 3

1

#- 9- "
I#
I)
a+

1

3
-

BE

1

-

1

5
-W

NF

N

"

?a

f+

d+

V

I III V

I III
EtVC

1

III I
11 a-

,

V

4

1

?c

?e

Example 2
I
V

5
1

3
1

11 X

X
c+

c+

?g

I
III

5
3

III
V

X 1
e

J
c+

"b

Example 3
7
5
-

a
a7

V
VI

11

6

11g6B
dVII

g6

I
VI

e
VI
eVI

Example 4
but furthermore also as shown in Example 4, and under certain circumstances, an essentially more complex [polyvalence] through
conflict with the preceding harmony;for example, the interval e to g,
after c# minor or Eb major. Of this there is no doubt: each uncertainty
over the meaning of an interval, in the sense of its representation of
the tonal complex, appears to us as a negativecharacteristicof such a
structure, which we struggle to overcome in order to gain complete
clarity. In other words: today we hear individual notes and intervals
always as representativesof triads (major or minor chords) according
to the available possibilities; the harmonic meaning of the individual
87

note in concrete individual cases is, to us, positively one of its most
essentialcharacteristics. attention be drawnhere to the definite inLet
clination of the interpreting mind to find its way easily through the
confusion of endless possibilities of tonal combinations(in melody and
harmony) by means of preferringsimple relationshipsover more complicated ones. This Principle of the GreatestPossible Economy for the
MusicalImaginationmoves directlytowardthe rejection of more complicated structures,where other possible meanings suggest themselves
that weigh less heavily on the powers of interpretation (even though
this conflicts strongly with actual intonations).8
A truly blatant example, to begin with, may bring to light the extent to which this economy of imagination works. The same example
places us at once in the midst of the conflictswith naturalmusical feeling to which pure tone-psychological investigations can lead. [Let us
assume that] one were to play on a purely-tuned harmoniumthe following four-voiced composition in completely pure harmonies:* No
*The annotatedfunctionsanalyzethe harmonieshere withoutthe errorsin intowithout
nation;that is, as thoughthey were to be labelledin C Majorthroughout,
the fatalstumblings
towardDb MajorandB Major.The individual
functional
symbols are also correctfor the falseintonations; is justthat,for example,the S (Subit
dominant)of the thirdchorddoes not applyto C Major,but ratherto Dl Major.
Unfortunately,the author must acknowledgethat the possibilityof accounting,
with functional
of
that are
designation,for the relationships even those harmonies
remote from the tonic has seducedintelligentmusicians,manytimes workingaccordingto the author'smethods,into viewingwhatevercan be analyzedas understandable.Even the frightfuleight-bar
in
exampleabove still wouldbe analyzable
C Major,namelyas:

T.. (S)[S] T (S) PS)' (S) :1 (Sp D7)1 TI (D7..) [B] IT
4

Figure 1
I certainlydo not need to assertthat it has never occurredto me to explainharmonicnonsenseof that kindas possiblein any way. A comparison the two analof
yses reveals better how logic prevailshere only so long as the same symbol is
repeatedin the superimposed
sharp,flat, or natural.The functionalsymbolsaphas
pearingin squarebrackets[S], [D] showclearlythatan impliedmodulation not
been madeby meansof the preceding
chord,andrevealthe half-tonelurchesof the
is
tonality.The studentof my Harmonielehre no doubt awarethat all of the prechordprogressions indeedpossiblewithouterror.The absurare
cedingindividual
of
dity lies only in the accumulation these far-fetchedimbroglios.Withoutthe

88

T
Analysis:

.

S T

S

+S

T

Sp

D7 T+ T

D7

..

T

Example 5
German listener will be in doubt for even a single moment as to what
these eight measures should represent, because the rhythm and the
linear direction of the melody in the upper voice is so familiarto him
that he recognizes it in spite of the horrible dislocations through false
intonations.9All chords with a sharp written above are a half step too
high, [and] all with a flat marked are played a half step too low in relation to those marked with a natural, in whose sense the entire melody will be heard. Since all four voices make the same error at the
same time, the individualchords are in themselves pure and it is therefore possible from the example to establish the limits of the power of
just intonation over the musical imagination. On a 53-note harmonium, like those that have been constructed for the acoustical investigations of Bosanquet, Helmholtz, Tanaka, Ottingen and others,10it
is easy to play these eight bars such that the chords with naturalswritten above them represent a pure C Major, those which are too high
withthe funcshifts,the examplewouldappearentirelyin Dl Major(in agreement
tional analysis)as:

'i" l
t ,LL,
i,}1
Analys:

e
T

r I IiKr JIr lr: rr$i

'r

r

e
rI
..

S T

S

S+ S

T

Sp

D7

f+

T

D7

..

T

Example 6
89

(with sharps) a pure Db Major, and those too low (with flats) a pure
B Major. But no power on earth can force the healthy musician to
hear something other than a repeated shifting of the pitch (wherever a
superimposedsharp, flat or naturaloccurs), and thus a series of bothersome intonational errors. He who does not know the folk tune will
understandablynot recognize it, but even for him the entire piece remains a senseless hodge-podge of chords that sound beautiful individually. Even an a cappella choir with the most solid sense of pitch will
prove themselves unable to perform the intonations that the mechanical instrument produces here. And yet the movements of the individual voice parts that result [from these chordal successions] do not
transcendthat which one can demand of a musical singer today. The
impossibilityof the performancelies purely and simply in the fact that
the [correct]consequences are not drawn from the complicated voice
motions, consequences which alone can motivate these motions and
make them intelligible.
A second illustrative example is the contrapuntal pairing of the
Freischiitz Waltz in D Major with the song "Lieber Augustin" in C
Major. I remember with great amusement that, as a young student,
Max Reger was able to play glibly through this combination at the
piano without stopping (see Example 7). The wit in this case lies in
this: the musician recognizes immediately that with the selection of
the same key for both melodies, the combinationis to a certain extent
possible because of the conformity of the [harmonic]functions. Thus,
the single, grotesque error is the playing of one of the two voices continually a whole tone too high or too low vis-a-vis the other. In the
case of both examples, an energetic protest of the perceiving tonal
imagination results-a protest against the individual intonations,
which it rejects without hesitation. Other cases that will occupy us
later differ from these two in that the error is so small that the imagination essentially ignores it. But the two examples will not be without
use, for they show us that our musical imaginationdoes not allow itself
to be thrown around aimlessly through superficial tonal attractions
but, on the contrary, has its own will, which it enforces continually
and everywhere in the sense of a centralization, a simplification of
tonal relations.
Therefore, we can now connect our further investigations with the
question: how far does our tonal imagination allow itself to travel,
through sounding music or through notation, away from the central
regions of the simplest mental images of music, the fundamentalscales
of C Major and A minor? Is it a deficiency or an arbitrarylimitation
when our notation stops with the doubly sharped and doubly flattened
notes of the fundamental scale? And what is the status, then, of such
matters as the Pythagorean comma, the syntonic comma and other
90

T
( ti r'Q,^

Ir L

i =

Example 7

similar[and] importantphenomena of acoustic theory? What does our
musical imagination know of these? In short, what do we actually
imagine?
It is certain that we do not imagine likenesses of notes, piano keys,
fingerings,motions of the larynx, or even numericaldesignations;nor
do we combine these and compare them. These are all things that play
a role in musical pedagogy or the scholarly discussion of musical relations, but they do not reveal the essence of the mental conception of
music, even though they must be recognized as attempts to come
closer to it. They are merely the results of investigations into those
things that mediate between the productive and reproductive mental
states of music. While constantly taking care that I have not underestimated the aesthetic value of real, existing sound, I point out nevertheless that an effective melody or an exceptional harmonic effect
will be altered in its essence neither through transposition to an entirely different key, nor through its performance on an entirely different instrument. One need think only of the common, standard
of
orchestra- and quartet-arrangements piano pieces, or of the transformation of harmonically-richinstrumentalworks into vocal pieces,
and the countless piano arrangements(earlier, in particular,the luteand organ-arrangements)of vocal works of all types (motets, madrigals, chansons). Undoubtedly, all such disguises (evincing, to an
extent, a very strong alteration of sound) originate in the conviction
that the essential core, the main point, remains preserved in themnamely, the essential musicality, the harmonic, rhythmic, and melodic
events. The high aesthetic value of string quartet music rests, in undisputed measure, on the renunciation of the course dynamic effects
and the contrastingtimbres of the orchestrain favor of the refinement
of design and the enrichment of melodic and harmonic details. Conversely, the threat to our good taste that lies in militarymusic and also
in music of the modern opera orchestra rests on the diversion of interest from the inward and intimate to the superficialand voluptuous.
91

II.
Pitch Level and Absolute Hearing
The ultimate elements of the tonal imagination are single tonesnot only single tones of varyingfrequency (melodic), but also those of
varying volume (dynamic), varying duration (rhythmic) and varying
weight (metric). For the mental image of tones, the conscious realization of the distinctionsof single tones in each of these areas implies
the emergence of more complicated formations. Here, in place of single tones, tonal successions enter, and notions of tonal motion come
into being. From a chain of isolated single facts, the tones become a
connected musical event and the understanding[of that event], as a
consequence of the expressive values that are tied to tone qualities,
becomes a psychic experience.Every musical work of art is such a psychic experience-not only in its origin in the productiveimaginationof
the composer, but likewise in the receiving and reproductive imagination of the hearer. The high ethical worth of music lies therein, that
it enables the receiving hearer to experience again what the heaveninspired artist experienced before. Of course, the degree of strength
of this "experiencingagain"depends on the capacityto follow the artist's succession of ideas-a capacity that assumes talent, but that can
be developed considerably through serious study. Thus it is true that
the ear may be educated and that music may be taught and learned.
However, with regard to the most expedient and effective directions
that musical pedagogy must pursue, varyingopinions are possible; indeed, the present work is intended to point out a new direction that
differs from those previously-knownand available, less in its ancillary
doctrines than in its total aim, its point of departure and final goal.
One would be inclined, not without justification, to assign this direction to the literature of musical aesthetics.* However, its strong contact with the musical practice of composition as well as performance
(reproduction) classifies it as music theory in the narrower sense-indeed, as a new branchof the speculativetheory of music, which one
also calls philosophy of music. If perhaps this [approach] is most
strongly in opposition to the new field of tone psychology, the explanation is to be sought in its close relationship to that discipline [and]
in the prevalence of materials common to these investigations, which
naturally tends to bring all divergences in detail immediately to the
[it
*Perhaps is] preciselymusicalaesthetics[that]will receive a powerfulimpulse
the
and
through settingup of the new nomenclature the new mannerof observation
of musicalevents. An effect on the aesthetictheory of other arts is certainlynot
is
in
excluded,sincein all cases the originandfinaljudgment doubtlessly the imagination.

92

fore. If, more than any other formulationof speculative music theory,
the theory of tonal imagination undertakes to explain just how listening to music can represent a psychic experience, then the way in which
the theory must proceed is prescribed: that is, it is a question first of
all of where the roots of the psychic values of the elements of music
(melody, harmony, rhythm, meter) may be found.
Here we encounter first of all the diversity of aestheticvaluationof
pitch level. Aesthetics has long known that "high" and "low" are actually transferals of the designation of spatial perceptions to a completely heterogenous domain; however, the dissemination of this
transferalamong all people of the earth certainly demonstrates a justification for its use. Besides high and low, light and dark, pointed
(sharp) and broad (dull, heavy) are in use for the same qualitativedistinction (oxys-barys,1 aigu-grave, fein-grob). All of these designations are certainly understandable when one considers that the
vibratingbody, which emits the various tones, presents smallerdimensions the higher the tones it produces [become], and larger dimensions
the lower the corresponding tones are. The old German name grob
[literally, crude or uncouth] for low brings this out very beautifully
(for example, in "grobgedakt,"which is retained to the present day in
organ study). The heavy mass of the vibrating body's lower tones is
drawn to the ground, [while] the diminutive dimensions of the vibrating body's higher tones appear light as a feather, floating weightlessly
above.
At this point it becomes understandablewhy tonal motion is valued
as an upward and downward motion in space and, at the same time,
as an alterationin strengthof light. Higher is at once brighter, lower at
once darker. In this fashion, the hearing of changes in pitch level is
transformedinto a vision of changes in location, and we already have
a presentimentof the ultimateidentification the essence of visual and
of
aural imagination. However, we still lack a complete explanation because tonal motions also have a definite value for our well-beingand
suffering and because we experience them like happiness and grief,
joy and pain. But here again, the key lies near enough in that musical
instrumentgiven to us by nature, the human voice. If at firstwe ignore
its artisticuse in songs, it is easy to observe in the speaking voice that
rising pitch motion is connected to more lively excitement, and descending pitch motion is a sign of calming. Thus one can even say that
as a consequence of a single tone's position in tonal space, a particular
aesthetic value is already appropriateto it-a value of pleasant or unpleasant sensation, of joy or suffering, which is determined by its distance from the limits of rising and falling tension. Our notation yields
the possibility of a clear determinationof this aesthetic value through
the position on the staff that it assigns to the particularpitch-level.
93

The notational symbol for the single tone is so familiarto the musician
that it calls forth in the imaginationwith greater or lesser exactness the
idea of the tone in question. For musicians with a pronounced socalled "absolutepitch" or "absolutehearing," the single note is bound
directly with the very definite and exact idea of the particularpitch
level. We can add that the imagination of pitch level can also be associated with the imaginationof tone color, for example, in the reading of a score that indicates the disposition of the individual
instruments. Even loudness and other details of special production
(harmonics, pizzicato of string instruments, staccato, etc.) go directly
from notational indication to the musical imagination and form integrated components of the mental image, just as they were components
of the mental image of the composer before the writing-downof the
notational symbols.
However, we shall consider first the imaginationof pitch level itself
and attempt to understandclearly what meaning it has for the degree
of strength of the experience of tonal motion, whether the listener is
gifted with "absolute pitch" or not.
A large numberof specialized studies by excellent researchershave
dealt with the problem of absolute pitch, of which those by Otto Abraham (Sammelb. d. Internat. MusikgesellschaftIII and VIII), Felix
Auerbach (same, VIII) and Hugo Leichtentritt (Voss. Zeitung 4.
These works are based
April 1915) may be singled out in particular.12
first of all on the importantfact that thepossession of absolute hearing
in no way offers a guarantee of substantialmusical talent. Although a
pronounced sense of pitch level must be considered an auspiciousprecondition for a musician (just as a pronounced sense of color is for the
painter), there are nevertheless not a few known cases of extraordinary musicians (Schumann, Wagner) who did not possess absolute
hearing, and, on the other hand, musicianswho enjoyed its possession
in most pronounced fashion, but who have proved themselves to be
nothing short of impervious to higher musical culture.
Now, in what consists the essence of absolute hearing? Generally,
it is said that with the sounding of a particulartone those who possess
this quality declare without reflection which tone it is; that is, they
know its note name-for example, F2. To this the objection may first
be made that F2 does not have an inevitable and fixed absolute pitch
level-that at the time of Bach and Handel, for example, the standard
of tuning was a whole tone higher than today, and therefore, our F2
was called Eb2.13 Consequently, one who is gifted with absolute hearing will always give his judgments and designations according to a
level of tuning to which he is used. I remember, at the entrance test
for the Wiesbaden Conservatory, a gifted eight-year-old child from
Biebrich, who declared abruptly, as he was played a tone from an old
94

Erard grand piano that was tuned considerably sharp: "There is no
such tone!" For this deviant intonation, he had no pigeonhole into
which to place this tone, despite his otherwise amazingtonal memory.
Certainly, absolute hearing is not circumscribedcompletely and
correctlywhen one says that it is a strong bond between pitch level and
notation. More correctly, it would have to be said that for one gifted
with absolute hearing the value of expression that is appropriateto a
tone on account of its height is extremely definite qualitatively. The
note name and notational sign represent only a conventional symbol,
which in no way has to coincide completely with this value. The absolute frequency number or the designation of wavelength14
would be
able to indicate the single tone and at the same time formulate the
value which the tone possesses for absolute pitch-level consciousness
more exactly than the note, whose sense and meaning changes according to the standardof tuning. A tone of 430 vibrations per second is,
with respect to its tonal effect, as definite as is possible in notation;
whether it is to be written or named as A or Ab depends on habituation to a particular standard of tuning. This, however, does not
change the tone's essence. Most importantto absolute hearing-what
it recognizes-is merely the consciousness of the quality of a tone that
we could call its "size"or "mass,"which is dependent on its frequency
or wavelength. The note or name by which it is designated is, on the
other hand, not fixed and varies according to place and time.
It is even possible that the possession of "absolute hearing" may
lead to the most embarrassingconflicts in practical musical performance-for example, in places where it is necessary to perform a
piece transposed. All of the wonderful methods for making transposition easier are useless when "absolute hearing"stands in the way. A
musician who possesses absolute pitch in a pronounced fashion endures tortures when he continually has to produce tones other than
those that he reads and therefore imagines and expects from the notation.
Profound skepticism is in order when the possessor of absolute
hearing maintains that he can definitely distinguish enharmonicallycoincident tones, like F# and Gb. For the differences in naming tones
as flats or sharps have nothing to do with absolute pitch level but
merely result from the internal construction of our tonal system and
notation. Consequently, in all cases of such alleged refined designations, an introductionof the theoretical concepts of harmony into the
area of absolute hearing takes place-a mixture of ideas that is certainly understandableand difficult to avoid but that, instead of simplifying recognition of the essence of absolute hearing, rather makes
it more difficult. To qualify an Ft or a Gb chord-which are identical
in our tempered system--as the one or the other is purely a matter of
95

mental interpretationand not dependent on varying intonation. Certainly, Ftt major and Gb major are two different mental images that
differ essentially from one another and that with no further information, may not be confused or equated. However, only notation and
harmonic logic (which leads to one or the other notation in the most
various ways) guarantee their difference.
Thus, the aesthetic value of absolute pitch level and simple pitchlevel motion (melody) rests merely on the rising and falling of pitch
level and their exciting and calming effect. It may be indicated further
that the realizationof ascents and descents in concrete cases leads, for
every melodic formation, to the recognition of a middle level, which
forms the point of "indifference"for ascents and descents. This middle level may mark the beginning of a piece, although it does not have
to; rather, it is also possible that a strong rising motion over this level
or a marked downwardmotion under it forms the beginning, and the
level only becomes prominent in the further course of the development. I also point out the importantdistinction of whether a soprano,
alto, tenor or bass sings a melody, or whether a flute or a bassoon, a
violin or a contrabassplays it. Since the given middle level alreadyhas
an absolute high or low value, the notion of pitch level is split into two
partial notions: that of absolute and that of relativepitch level. Fresh
evidence of expressive values for our psychic sensation is unnecessary
in this regard. We can only establish generally that the up and down
of tonal motion can play itself out in stronglydifferent regionsof tonal
activity-in the light upper reaches, in the darker depths, or in the
middle level. For larger sections of more extended works one can
therefore speak also of the raising or lowering of the middle level,
which, as such, alters the total state of our musical experience.
Thus, as a result of the valuation of pitch-level motion as alternating rising and falling, striving and renunciation, will and resignation,
a psychic experience emerges comparableto an ascent into the lighter
regions and a descent into the darker, like the flight of the bird in the
air or the swimmingof the fish in water-not as something viewed, but
as something actually experienced. The imaginingof these motions is
a true participation with the Will; the soul, the living human spirit,
carries out these motions itself and through them rejoices in its existence and its efficacy. If the tonal domain, within which tonal motions
are completed, appears to us as a wonderland in which the restless
wanderingof the soul is an inexhaustible source of aesthetic joy, this
will be the case to a much greaterextent when we become awareof the
infinite possibilities for harmonic relationships of single tones, an
awarenessthat makes the inner articulationof the tonal domain comprehensible to the mind that marvels at it.
96

III.
The Representation of Tonal Complexes
If the distinctionsof pitch level were only one-dimensional, [and] if
they were exhausted with the establishment of greater or lesser
height-that is, greater or lesser speed of frequency, or greater or
lesser wavelength-then from the lowest point rising to the highest
point, or the highest point falling to the lowest point, the tones would
appear ever more foreign to one another the farther apart they were,
or ever more similarthe closer they were. But that is certainlynot the
case. The theoretical view of tonal relationships has long ago led to
the knowledge that besides the differences in frequency and wavelength, which can yield only a very large number of single intonations
lying next to one another, the commensurabilityof these same designations collapses single tones into groups and brings closer together
single tones that lie far apart with respect to pitch height. In a similar
manner, the starryheaven with its countless single worlds arrangesitself for the astronomer into a number of systems, of which one of
many is our solar system. While it is beyond me to carrythis comparison further, it is importantto remember nevertheless that the ancient
Greeks, and before them the Egyptians, compared the constructionof
the scale to the solar system in all earnestness. It is to them that we
owe the knowledge that the essence of consonance and of the fusability of two tones to a higher unity rests on the commensurabilityof
their designations [Verlaufsbedingungen]--that on the simplest nuis,
merical relationshipsthat correspondto their wavelengths or frequencies. The late Middle Ages had already progressed from the notion of
intervallicconsonance to chordal consonance, and our age has found
in the concept representation tonal complexes the magic word that
of
gives the key to the solution of the final riddle of tonal relations.
Scotus Erigena (died, 880)15already progressed from the Quaternarius numerusof the Pythagoreansto the Senariusnumerus, and saw in
the numbers 1-6 the solution to the riddle of the nature of harmony
(De divisione naturae,ed. Schliiter, p. 533).16Gioseffo Zarlino (1558)
finally discovered the wonder of the contrast between major and
minor harmonythrough the opposition of two forms of the senariusas
1
Divisio arithmetica and Divisio harmonica: 1:2:3:4:5:6 and 1:2:3:4:5:6'
Thus he learned that the simplest numericalrelations 1-6, with regard
to frequency, describe the essence of consonance of the major triad,
and that the same relations, with regard to wavelength, describe the
essence of the minor consonance.17To the numerical relationships
1:2, 2:3, 3:4, 4:5, and 5:6 correspondthe intervals of the octave, fifth,
fourth, major third and minor third; that is, in ascent (frequency),
97

-

-.

1

2

3

4

5

6

5

6

Example 8

1

2

3

4

Example 9

the components of the major triad (see Example 8) and in descent
(wavelength) those of the minor harmony (see Example 9). The
Messeltheorieof the Arabs in the fourteenth century extended the series of numbersto twelve in order to prove the consonance of the sixth
(compare my Studien zur Geschichteder Notenschrift[Leipzig, 1878],
p. 77-85).18

Through this discovery of the alliance of tones and harmonies, as
whose representatives tones are understood and perceived, the defthe
inition of the single tones is made much richer. However, the system
as a whole is not made more complicated thereby, but simpler and
more lucid. Through the equivalence, or at least the more intimate
relationship,of tones that stand in octave relation,the numberof tones
belonging to a single harmony is reduced to three altogether: the
prime (and its octaves = 1:2:4:8:16, etc.), the fifth (and its octaves=
3:6:12, etc.), and the third (and its octaves =5:10:20, etc.), above as
well as below.
The single tones of our notational system acquire manifold meanings, each accordingto the extent to which they may be understood as
arising from a central tone (prime or tonic) through motions by fifth,
third, or a combination of both. For example, E [may be understood]
as the fourth fifth of C (C:G:D:A:E) or directly as third of C; the first
is i of a whole-tone higher than the last, at least accordingto acoustical numericaldesignations.19Here we confront the question of how
the various acoustical values of single tones are imagined. It has long
been understood and established that we definitely notice the difference in tuning between the fifth E and the third E. But it is likewise
98

established that we can be satisfied with an average of the two, as
equal-tempered, 12-tone tuning offers (compare the table s.v.
in
"Tonbestimmung" my Musik-Lexikon):
ThirdE .............................
12-tonetemperedE

=0.32192
=0.33333

in
Logarithms base 2

(=1/3)

Fifth E ..............................
third)
(Pythagorean

=0.33984

Those who advocate the introductionof school instrumentsin pure
intonation are of the opinion that the surrogate intervals of temperament blunt the ear's ability to distinguish exact intonation-that is,
that they damage that organ. With the introductionof pure intervals,
[this faction] expects an increased desire for their performance, without exception, and thereby a heightened tonal sense. Circumstances
are such, however, that these hopes must prove illusory. On the one
hand, the implementation of pure tuning would complicate significantly the instruments and methods of practical music making, and
render their use a near impossibility. On the other hand, our organ of
hearingfortunatelyis so disposed thatabsolutelypure intonationis definitely not a matter of necessityfor it. Certainly, it perceives purely
tuned harmonieswith pleasure and enjoys their sensual euphony with
heightened consciousness; yet, this gain would be bought at too high
a price if it were only possible through the renunciation of the free
motion of harmony and through limitation of modulation. However,
the primary question is and remains: What do we imagine? Do we
think in tempered or pure intervals?Since the creation of a truly exact
equal temperament is scarcely possible anyway (even the tuner can
only begin to reach it through artificialdeviations from the clear demands of the ear), it appears at first glance, to be sure, that temperament is a white lie-that the absolutely purely intoned fifths (2:3) and
the thirds intoned 4:5 are what our natural tonal sense requires. A
small practical example may oblige us to take a position on this fundamental question. The cadence as shown in Example 10 contains the
Parallelklangof the subdominant(D F A) announcedby its dominant;
[the Parallelklang]then goes to the dominant and returnsto the tonic.
Hauptmann raised the contention that this D F A (in Hauptmann's
notation, D |IF a) is not a pure harmony, since its fifth is a syntonic
comma (= To a whole tone) too small (= 27:40). The intonation of
of
this little example is (in Helmholtz's improved notation instead of
as
Hauptmann's)20 shown in Figure 2. Thus, the alto must transform
itself from d to d in the second measure (d is the lower fifth of the third
of the subdominant;d is fifth of the dominant). Our musical practice
99

T

r

2

(D)

r

i

D

Sp

T

Example 10
ceg

-a

(c+ -

cis ea+ -

- ghd

dfa

?a-

g+-

-ce

g

c+)

Figure 2
d :f:a:

c

Figure 3
F a C e Gh D
Figure 4
knows nothing of these two Ds in C major, and our tonal consciousness is even less aware that d:f:a would not be a pure minor chord, but
rather a type of diminished triad (with the fifth 27:40 instead of 2:3).
Certainlywe imagine the D-minor chord as Parallelklangas shown in
Figure 3, and not as a composite mixture of subdominant and dominant as Hauptmann wants (Figure 4). Were it not a pure triad, we
would not be able to imagine its dominant (is there a dominant of b d
f [Hauptmann'sb 11 F]? Certainly not!) In other words, our imagiD
nation knows nothing of the tuning difference d and d, but rather
equates both, and imagines d as lower fifth of a and at the same time
also as upper fifth of g. This enharmonic identificationof acoustical
values that differ by a syntonic comma is simply indispensable to our
musicalhearing. According to the opinion of the defender of pure tuning, the Parallelklangof the subdominant of C major: d:f:a is completely different and has no tones in common with the double
dominant:d:f#:a, to the extent that one does not cling to the fifth (d:a;
27:40) that binds the two chords through the D. We want to transcend
100

this single case and give a general view of how and where-that is, at
whatpoints in general we imagine the variouskeys in relationshipto the
basic scale. I assume that my essay will serve to stimulate responses of
other musicians to the new question; if as a consequence, differences
and oppositions do not fail to appear, these nevertheless will certainly
help to clarify the question and thereby contribute to laying the foundations for the theory of tonal imagination.
IV.
Establishing the Residence of Chords and Keys
Through the concepts of the dominants (upper dominant and subdominant), the relative keys [Parallele]and the [modal]variants,close
relationships are clearly established and [become] common property
for a large number of keys. That is, we can assume as established that
all musiciansimagine C major as fifth-relatedto G major and F major,
and that A minor, through the commonality of all tones (parallelism)
likewise stands very near [to C]. However, C minor must also be recognized as closely related to C major. This will not appear as selfevident on account of the three flats, which can easily mislead [one] to
search for and imagine C minor in the area of Eb major, which is to
be found three descending fifths from C. The well-known table of
tonal relationships21
(see Figure 5) which may be carried further optionally in all horizontal rows (through further fifth successions), displays synopticallya large numberof varyingtone designationsthrough
ascendingfifths (right), descending fifths (left), ascending thirds (up),
and descending thirds (down). All major chords are in the area A, all
minor chords in the area V (root and fifth are in the same row; overthirdis in the next higher row, under-thirdin the next lower one). The
vertical columns show successions of chromatic seconds, which are
distinguishedfrom one another by two comma strokes (F , F, F#, Fx),
since each [component of a vertical column] leaps over a horizontal
row. The diagonalsrunningupwardfrom left to right show successions
of major thirds (6bb, Fb, iAb,c, E, G#, B ); those runningdownward
from left to right show successions of minor thirds (B, D, F, A, c,
,
Ebb etc.). The framed middle part shows the fundamental scale of
C major, or respectively, A minor, both with the double value, d and
d. The table shows directlythe determinationof every intervalaccording to fifth or third successions and discloses for every multiplydetermined interval the simplest and closest derivation [from C]: for
example, for Fx as F 3 T (fifth of the 3rd third, or 3rd third of the fifth).
If we inquire, by use of this table, as to the location-that is, thefixed
relationshipof the usual transposedkeys--we see immediately that we
may understand only G major, D major, F major, and Bb major as
101

Rowof Upper
3rds)
(3rd
Rowof Upper
3rds)
(2nd
3rds)
(1stRowof Upper

Rowof Lower
(3rd
3rds)

Figure 5
purely fifth-related to C; that is, we imagine the tonic primes (I) of
only these four keys as reachable by fifth progressionfrom C, the center.22We understandtheir relative minors [Paralleltonarten] minor,
E
B minor, D minor and G minor, whose tonic primes (I) are determined by fifth progression from the central tone e, as directly connected with these [major keys] (through identity of elements of their
scales).23Thus, only the keys of the first and second fifths above and
below the central keys C major and A minor count as purely fifthrelated. Another meaning arises for A major and Eb major, and likewise for C minor and F# minor (the minor-third-relatedkeys on both
sides). A major is not the key of the dominant of D major, but the
variant of A minor; C minor is not the subdominantof G minor, but
the variant of C major. Through this change in meaning, both move
substantiallycloser to the center (see Figure 6). Likewise, we understand Eb not as subdominantof Bb major, but as relative major [Parallele] of C minor, and F# minor not as minor dominant of B minor,
but as relative minor [Parallele] of A major (see Figure 7). Through
these manipulations,however, the degree of relationshipto the tonic
(prime) proves to be (F= ascending fifth, T= ascending third;
1/F= descendingfifth, 1/T = descending third) (see Figure 8). The Law
102

AMajor:

a

e

b6 [f]

C

e

instead
of:

c [g d]

g

a

instead
of:

cg [ d aj e
el 4

c
e
C Minor:

c
e6

Figure 6

g
EbMajor:

c

g

t?

e;

c#

F#Minor: f#
a

instead

e

of:

instead
of:

e'
<

e [b] f# c#
a

Figure 7
of the Greatest Possible Economy of Imagination shows its powerful
force here with great clarity. The further transposed keys are once
again clearly linked by fifth-relationto those just designated; that is,
E major and B major are the keys of the first and second rising fifths
from A major. For E major, the direct third-relationwith the tonic is
also valid; likewise, Ab major is the under-thirdkey of C major and
Db major its subdominant. Correspondingly,F minor and Bb minor
are at home as the first and second under-fifthsof C minor; likewise,
C# minor and G#tminor are the first and second upper fifths from F#
minor (see Figure 9). For the most remote keys, F# major and C#
major, Gb major and Cb major, Eb minor and Ab minor and D#
minor and Al minor, mediation through their [modal] variantor their
relative keys [Parallelen](for whom homes have already been found)
appearsagain to be offered (see Figure 10). At this point the complete
domain of tones that may be regarded as major or minor tonics
(primes) is moved into the closest distance to the central tones C and
103

T
A Major: Prime = a = - insteadof: a = 3F (figuredfromc)
F

E6Major: Prime = e -= i minstead e
of:
T

CMinor: Prime = g =

F
T

=

3F

(figuredfrom c)

ie 1
from
insteadof: g =
(figuredfrom e)
3r

T
F Minor: Prime = c# = F insteadof: c# = 3 F (figuredfrom e)
F
Figure 8
E (see Figure 11). Thus, [there are] a total of twenty-two tonal values,
of which however =A and E t (and also Gt and D t) can only come into
question as primes in minor (in D,t minor and Afl minor, and respecminor and GOI
l (as well as Db
minor), while b and
tively, COt
and A can only occur as primes in major (in Cb major and Gb major,
b)
and respectively, Db major and Ab major). I will not maintain that
with this the totality of all imaginabletones is described, but the tonics
(primes) certainly [are]. Through the major dominants of the lastnamed minor keys with sharps, the fourth upper-thirdcolumn grows
by a few tones, as does the third column of under-thirds,through the
minor subdominants of the last-named major keys with flats24(see
Figure 12). To go further than this makes little sense. Dl and Gb
minor can certainly occur as keys on occasion for short stretches of
time (in pieces in Db major and Gb major); however, these keys
scarcely bring any new tones with them. Higher major keys with
major) are hardly imaginable without ensharps (Gtl major and DOt
harmonic transformation, and may remain out of the discussion, as
easy as they are ultimately to describe schematically. The fourteen
transpositionsof the major and minor scales from Cb to C# major and
Ab to A# minor certainly represent an immense space for harmonic
motion, which occurs along with absolute pitch-heightas a completely
different tonal value. Each key, through its type of derivation from
the fundamental scale (that is, through the fifth and third chains in
ascent and descent), has a particularcharacter.To define it briefly, all
steps upward make the character brighter and more radiant, [while]
all steps downward make it darker and cloudier. Since, however,
104

1
E Major: e = T
B Major: b=

FT

F Minor: c=
B

1
T

figured
fromc

A Major: ab= T
D Major: d=

1
FT

figured
fromc

C Minor: g#= T
figured
frome

Minor: f=FT

figured
frome
G Minor: d"= FT

Figure 9

as
F# Major parallel
frome)
majorof : Minor,thatis I = f# = T (figured
2F
C# Majoras parallel
majorof C# Minor,thatis I = c# =F

T

E; Minoras parallel
minorof E; Major, is I = b = 2
that
A Minoras parallel
minorof A; Major, is I = e~=
that

frome)
(figured
from c)
(figured

F
from c)
T (figured

D# Minoras relative
minorof F# Major,
thus I = a# = 2
2F

from e)
(figured

A# Minoras relative
minorof C# Major,
thus I = e# = 2T (figured
from e)
F
G6 Major relative
as
from c)
(figured
majorof E' Minor,thus I = gb = 2
2T

C&
Majoras relative
majorof A6 Minor,thus I =

F (figured
fromc)
2T

Figure 10
105

oa# oe#

f#

c# og# od#

d

a

e

b

f#

b1

f

c

g

d

Figure 11

Dominant of D# Minor: a#

cx

e#

Dominant of A# Minor: e#

gx

b#

Subdominantof G Major:c

e

Subdominantof C Major: f'

4

a[

gb
c;

Figure 12
major-as opposed to minor-already has a bright and radianteffect,
the brightest keys are the major keys with many sharps, and the darkest are the minor keys with many flats. In my analysis of the WellTemperedClavierI have attempted to show how the characterof the
keys affects the thematic invention in them.25 Restrictions of space
prevent me from going into greater detail concerning the problems of
harmony as a subfield of tonal imagination, for naturally I cannot
write a textbook on that topic here. Rather, by way of a few notes, I
am attempting merely to give some idea of what an all-inclusive area
this is. I renounce completely any attempt to give a similarorientation
for the imagination in the area of musical rhythm. This is not to say
106

that clues are lacking. The complete theory of phraseology and the
theory of musical period structurerest on the logic of tonal imagination in the area of rhythm. The distinction between lower and higher
degrees of light and heavy, the transformationof heavy values into
of
light ones and vice versa, [and] the boundary-articulations motives
and phrases, etc., etc. are all nothing other than segments of a theory
of tonal imagination applied to the area of rhythm. Even the distinctions between opposing themes and between thematic and nonthematicparts, and thus the whole practicaltheory of composition and
form, constantly treat none other than those structuresthat the composer imagines and combines.

V.
Auxiliary Mental Images (Leading tones)
I should like to bring up only one more question, which belongs to
the most fundamental, primitive theory of music: that is, how do we
imagine more complex voice motions?
The simplest to imagine are doubtlessly the stepsfrom one chordal
component to another (prime, third, fifth) in which the harmony remains the same (1-5, 1-3, 5-1, 3-1, 3-5, 5-3, or in minor, I-V, I-III,
V-I, III-I, III-V, V-III). The collected intervals that come about in
this way are consonant.
The change from a component of one harmony to a component of
another closely related to it is already a more complex operation of
the imagination. Only some of the steps that result thereby are consonant intervals. With the "plain-fifthstep" (T-D, ?T-?S),besides consonant (harmonic) intervals, melodic ones (seconds) also appear:26
1-5, 1-3, 3-5, 5-1, 3-1, 5-3
T-D, T-D, T-D, D-T, D-T, D-T.
With the "whole-tone step" (S-D), melodic steps are actually in the
majority:
1-1, 3-3, 5-5, 1-3, 3-1, 5-3, 3-5
S-D, S-D, S-D, D-S, S-D, S-D, D-S
are steps of a second, and only
3-5, 5-3, 5-1, 1-5, 1-5, 5-1
S-D, D-S, S-D, D-S, S-D, D-S
are harmonic (fifths, fourths, minor thirds [major sixths]).
107

1-3 and 3-1
S-D D-S
are possibly unmelodic [skips] (augmented fourths), concerningwhich
there is more to say.
The elementary singing method of the future that takes into account the theory of tonal imaginationwill give thoroughconsideration
to the systematic practice of all such melodic motions to a component
of another harmony, and it will have to order the resulting difficulties
progressively and work on their conquest. I am thinking of these future exercises in particularwhen I point out a circumstancethat comes
up in this connection. Whole categories of intervals are not directly
imagined, but rather need an auxiliary mental image [Hilfsvorstellung]. Strictlyspeaking, this is true even for the harmonic(consonant)
intervals from one harmony to another, as for example 3-5 (in C
major: A-D). Not to be conscious of the harmonicprogression S-D,
but ratherto sing mechanicallya fourth or a fifth as though it were I-V
or 5-1 above an oblique D major or minor, would be a fatal white lie,
which would avenge itself soon enough through its lack of any use in
the development of excellence. However, if one definitely imagines
the subdominantF with the A, and just as definitely the dominant G
with the D, one finds the D not directly from the A, but through the
auxiliarymental image of the two primes, F and G (see Example 11).
The tritone, F-B, is also to be intoned with reliability above the auxiliary mental image of G. However, for it there is still another possibility (see Example 12). When C follows B, the mental image of the
following C-of the fifth (or lower fourth) of F-suffices in order to be
able to find and intone the B with security. However, a preparatory
schooling in intonation of the leading-tonemelodic progression is certainly necessary to guarantee this possibility-a schooling that is one
of the most important tasks of elementary vocal instruction. A large
number of intervals become easily singable (imaginable) through the
auxiliary mental image of a succeeding leading tone (even when it
does not follow in reality) (see Example 13). Like the ascendingleading tones, the descending ones can also be drawn upon to make intervals that are difficult to deal with easy (see Example 14). In some
cases the auxiliary, imagined tone can have multiple meanings, but
that is not too significant. The important common attribute of all of
these cases is that a voice progression that is difficult to imagine in
itself is made easy throughthe auxiliarymentalimage of tones to which
it leads (ascendingor descendingleading tone). Since the leading tone
is always thirdof the fifth (or lower-thirdof the lower-fifth)of the tone
to which it leads, a close relationship between this phenomenon of
imagination and the easily understood and imagined secondary dom108

3

i

[1

5

1]

J [--l]

r

Example 11
(diminishedfifth)

-J

U I r 'r

rj

Example 12
1
T

3
T

1
T

3
D

1
T

1
T

3
S

5
D

" r
r
f'
rF f' 11 #J' 11 J,,) r "r(11
(augmentedsecond)

(diminishedthird)

(diminishedfourth) (chromatichalf step)

Example 13
(diminishedfourth)

(augmentedsecond)

(diminishedthird) (chromaticwhole tone)

r
. vJ., 11 J., 11 rr("-''
r I"' 11
3

51

3

15

3

15

1

3

T

T (D)

D

D (T)

D

T (S)

T

T

Example 14
inants and subdominantsmay be established, even if the phenomena
are not identical. The leading chords, which contain a leading tone to
all three tones of the following chord, also belong in the same category
(for example, F#t-G; Gb-F, etc.).
That we imagine tonal relationshipsthoroughlyin the sense of pure
tuning is beyond question. However, [the question of] how it is possible in spite of this that the imperfect, compensatory intonation of
our commonly used tempered music satisfies us and proves to be a
usable means of allowing the tonal imaginingsof the composer to arise
once again in the imaginationof the listener must be reserved for discussion in a later, new study. The possibility (even the necessity) of
the exchange of coinciding enharmonic tone-values intrudes upon us
109

from all sides as soon as modulation strays into regions that allow a
more in the centralarea of the tonal system. No
simpler understanding
no matter how exact, can stop this simplificationof the unintonation,
derstanding.Consequently, I express my conviction that it is the study
of enharmonic identificationthat ultimatelywill solve and explain the
contradictionsbetween the results of tone-psychologicalinvestigations
and the practical experiencesof musicians.

110

NOTES ON THE TRANSLATION
1. There is some confusionas to the date of this publication,which Seidel and
Mickelsengive as 1874.The workexistsin severalguises;it was entitled"Uber
das musikalische
H6ren"as Riemann'sdissertation
(Universityof Gottingen,
1873). It was printedtwice in Leipzig, in 1873 as Musikalische
Logik, and in
1874underthe dissertation's
title. The workappearedeven earlierin the Neue
Zeitschrift Musik,vol. 68 (1872),publishedas "Musikalische
fir
Logik,"under
the pseudonymHugibertRies. This version was later reprintedin Praludien
und Studien: Gesammelte Aufsdtze zur Asthetik, Theorie und Geschichte der

Musik,Vol. 3 (Leipzig, 1895), 1-22.
2. In referring his previouspublications phrasemarkings,
to
on
Riemann's
citation
is incorrect. His 1882 article in Musikalisches Wochenblatt: Organ far Musiker

undMusikfreunde
dealswithissues
(Leipzig),"Einemusikalische
Tagesfrage,"
to
He
meansto cite his 1883articles
relating tuningandtemperament. probably
fromMusikalisches
vol.
and
Wochenblatt, 14: "Uebermusikalische
Phrasirung"
"DasMusik-Dictat Vehikelder Phrasirungslehre."
als
These two markthe be"Was
ginningof a seriesof articleson rhythmand phrasestructure,
including:
ist eigentlich Phrasirung?",
Vol. 16 (1885), "Gesangphrasirung,"
Vol. 18
als
(1887), "Die Phrasirungbezeichnung dauernderBestandtheilder Notenschriftder Zukunft,"Vol. 19 (1888), and later "ZurKlarung Phrasirungsder
frage,"Vol. 25 (1894).
3. System der Musikalischen Rhythmik und Metrik (Leipzig). The publication year

shouldbe 1903, not 1904as Riemannstates.

4. Grosse Kompositionslehre, vol. 3, Der Orchestersatz und der dramatische Ge-

sangstil(Berlinand Stuttgart,1913).
5. Alexander Wheelock Thayer, Ludwig von Beethovens Leben (Leipzig, 1907-

8).
6. Riemann'sarticleincludesthree footnotes; these have been indicatedin the
text by an asterisk.
7. Tonhohehas been translated
here as pitchheightin orderto makethe distinction between what Revesz terms "pitchheight" and "pitchquality,"terms
whichare renderedby present-day
as
psychologists
respectively "pitchheight"
and "chroma" by musictheoristsas "pitch"and "pitchclass").
(or
8. Presumably,
Riemannrefershere to the discrepency
betweenthe simpleratios
of just intonationand those of temperedtuning.
9. The tune is "Die Lorelei"by Friedrich
Silcher(1789-1860).
10. J. MurrayBarbournotes that the nineteenthcenturywas "particularly
rife"
with experimental
attemptsto increasethe numberof divisionswithinthe octave (Tuning and Temperament:A Historical Survey [rpt. New York, 1972], p.

into111). This researchwas directlyrelatedto the fact that "just"or "pure"
nation was favoredby most music theoristsof the century-Sechter, Hauptmann, Helmholtzand Ottingenamong them. One purposefor buildingsuch
instruments to provethe superiority puretuningover temwas
of
experimental
peredsystems,andin so doing, to justifythe acousticbasesof these theoretical
systems.These experimentsin intonationwere generallycarriedout on harmoniumsthat were built usingone of two principles:
eitherthe octavewas divided into multipleparts by extendingprinciplesof Pythagorean
tuning,just
111

tuning, or both; or the octave was divided into multiple acoustically-equal
was
parts. Shohe Tanaka's"Enharmonium" among the most famous of the
formertype, whileR. H. M. Bosanquet's
was
"generalized
keyboard" the most
successful the lattervariety.Not all acousticresearchers
of
favoredthe 53-note
as
commentsuggests.Indeed,the harmonium
harmonium, Riemann's
designed
with
by HermannHelmholtzwas among the more conservativeinstruments,
only 24 notes per octave [Helmholtz,On the Sensations Tone, trans. A. J.
of
Ellis (rpt. New York, 1954), 315-318].
Barbour
of
inprovidesan excellentsummary these andotherexperimental
in
struments Tuningand Temperament 107-132), and in his "JustIntona(pp.
tion Confuted"
sourcesinclude:
[Musicand Letters19 (1938):56-58]. Primary
im
Shohe Tanaka,"Studien Gebiete der reinenStimmung,"
Vierteljahrsschrift
fiir Musikwissenschaft 6 (1890): 1-90; R. H. M. Bosanquet, An Elementary
Treatise on Musical Intervals and Temperament (London, 1876) and "Temperament; or, the Division of the Octave," Proceedings of the Musical Association

to
(1874-75): 4-17; andA. J. Ellis'sappendices Helmholtz,On the Sensations
of Tone, 466-483.

11. These words,transliterated
here fromthe Greek, mean high-pitched bass
and
in musicalcontexts,sharpand heavy in other contexts.
12. Otto Abraham, "Das absolute Tonbewusstsein.Psychologisch-musikalische
Studie," Sammelbande der Internationalen Musikgesellschaft 3 (1901-2): 1-86;

Otto Abraham,"Das absoluteTonbewusstsein die Musik,"Sammelbdnde
und
der Internationalen Musikgesellschaft 8 (1906-7): 486-491; Felix Auerbach,

"Das absoluteTonbewusstsein die Musik,"Sammelbande Internatiound
der
nalen Musikgesellschaft 8 (1906-7): 105-112.

13. Riemannwas obviouslyawarethatthe "absolute"
standards pitchhavevarfor
ied over time; his comment is somewhatsimplistic,however. Although his
statementis correctwith regardto 17th-century
Germanorgan tuning, Riemannfails to mentionthat there were in fact severalpitch standards
concurrentlyused in the Baroqueera. Accordingto modernscholarship,
the terminology not systematic, its scopevariedin different
was
and
regions.
The oldestandstablesttermis choirpitch .... Thiswasoften contrasted
with a chamber pitch . . . lying a whole tone lower. Several north German

authorsdescribeda second chamberpitch a semitone lower still. During
Bach'stenureat Leipzig,singers,woodwinds, stringstunedto Kammerand
ton; the organand trumpetswere pitchedin Chortona whole tone above.
Othertermsdenotedstandard
pitchfor highwinds ... and for opera. [The
New Harvard Dictionary of Music, s.v. "pitch (4)"]

14. Throughout next sectionof this essay Riemannrefersto mehroderweniger
the
der
Rie(greateror lessersize of soundwaves).
GropJ Schallwellen
Presumably,
mannrefersto the timeorperiodof a waveformandnot its amplitude.
Thishas
been translated "wavelength"
as
In
throughout. his earlieressay, Das Problem
des harmonischen Dualismus [Leipzig, 1905; reprint from Neue Zeitschrift fur

Musik(1905):1-4], Riemanndiscoversthe "trueroot of harmonic
dualism"
in
the oppositionof the ratiosof frequencyvibrationnumbersin ascentto ratios
of stringlengthsin descent.In the presentessay, Riemann
seemsto be usingthe
temporalperiodof a wave formfor preciselythe same purposeas he had used
the spatiallengthof a stringin the earlierwork.

112

15. Riemann's repeated assertions in History of Music Theory, Books 1 and 2
[trans. Raymond H. Haggh (Lincoln, 1962), 11-12, 14, 21, 23, and elsewhere]
that De Divisione Naturae of Johannes Scotus Erigena is the earliest extant
treatise that clearly describes organum, pre-dating Musica enchiriadis of
pseudo-Hucbald, has engendered considerable controversy. See, for example,
Jacques Handschin, "Die Musikanschauung des Johannes Scotus (Erigena),"
[Deutsche Vierteljahrsschriftfur Literaturwissenschaft und Geistesgeschichte 5
(1927)] and Henry George Farmer, Historical Facts for the Arabian Musical Influence [(London, 1930); chapter 48, "John Scotus and Organum"]. Much of
the controversy surrounds Riemann's translation. De Divisione Naturae is a
theological tract, and the passage may not concern early polyphony at all. Raymond Haggh's commentary on Riemann's History of Music Theory (p. 346) argues that
The treatise De divisione naturae is philosophical in nature and is concerned
primarily with the science of musica, representing it in terms of dialectic,
arithmetic, geometry, and astrology. Whether the quotation given by Riemann can be regarded as a description of a type of musical composition is by
no means a certainty.
Regarding Riemann's contention that Scotus Erigena embraced the senario
and "saw in the numbers 1-6 the solution of the riddle of the nature of harmony," much less has been written. Henry George Farmer, however, devotes
an entire chapter to John Scotus and polyphony. Much of this chapter recounts
an extended polemic between himself and Kathleen Schlesinger ["Is European
Musical Theory Indebted to the Arabs?; Reply to the Arabian Influence on Musical Theory," Musical Standard (May 2 and 16, 1925) and several subsequent
articles], who espouses Riemann's views for the most part. Farmer argues that
the senario is a common philosophical concept that has appeared in a number
of contexts in the writings of various authors, and that John Scotus possibly
does not refer to sounding music at all. Further, he objects to Schlesinger's argument that John Scotus was an expert musician with practical knowledge of
the music of his day.
16. De Divisione Naturae is available in several editions. Riemann's source was a
mid-19th century printing, edited by C. B. Schliiter (Monasterii Guestphalorum, 1838). It may also be found in vol. 122 of J. P. Migne's Patrologiae cursus
completus, Series Latina, and in a modern reprint edition [Frankfurt am Main,
1964]. Partial translations are available in Periphyseon: On the division of Nature, translated by Myra L. Uhlfelder (Indianapolis, 1976) and Periphyseon (De
Divisione Naturae) Liber Primus, translated and edited by I. P. SheldonWilliams (Dublin, 1968), though neither of these publications translates the
passage that Riemann cites regarding the senario.
17. This description of the opposition of major and minor, with its distinction between ascent in frequency and descent in wavelength, is an even more striking
misreading of Zarlino than Riemann presents in his History of Music Theory
(Mickelsen, 107-109). In essence, this is Zarlino reinterpreted according to Riemann's ideas in Das Problem des harmonischen Dualismus (see note 14). A
number of writers have commented on Riemann's misinterpretation of Zarlino,
disputing his contention that Zarlino was the first to discover the dualistic opposition of major and minor. Among these are Carl Dahlhaus ("War Zarlino

113

Dualist?" Die Musikforschung 10/2 [1957]:286-290), Robert W. Wienpahl
("Zarlino, the Senario, and Tonality," Journal of the American Musicological
Society 12/1 [1959], particularly pages 29-30 and 34), Mickelsen, pp. 6-8 and
Ruth A. Solie in her review of Mickelsen (19th Century Music 2/2 [1978]: 184).
Briefly, Riemann's position hinges principally upon two errors in translation.
First, as all of the above authors note, Riemann errs in his translation of Zarlino's "replicate" as "Oktavversetzungen" or "inversions," when Zarlino clearly
means "compound intervals." Thus, as Solie states,
. . . Riemann develops an image of chords in thirds and fifths constructed
mirror-like on either side of a fundamental tone, whereas Zarlino's reference is simply to a contrapuntal style of which thirds, fifths, tenths, twelfths,
and so on constitute the basic vocabulary (p. 184).
Dahlhaus points out a number of additional similar mistakes in Riemann's
translation and interpretation. Second, both Dahlhaus (p. 290) and Wienpahl
(p. 29) note a passage in which Riemann miscopied the original, substituting the
singular della Terza for Zarlino's plural delle Terze. So where Zarlino speaks of
the two types of thirds and their positioning in the upper or lower part of the
fifth (to create major and minor triads), Riemann interprets only one type of
third and places it above and below the fundamental to create the two types of
triads. This misinterpretation, of course, supports Riemann's position that
Zarlino was the earliest adherent to the dualistic view of the major and minor
triads as polar opposites.
18. Riemann's purpose in this passage is to trace the expansion of accepted musical
ratios from the Pythagorean system of 1:2:3:4, through the senario of Zarlino,
and finally to a series of twelve that he attributes to the 14th-century Arab theorist Mahmud al-Schirazi, also known as Qutb al-Din (Mickelsen, p. 110, and
Studien zur Geschichte der Notenschrift, pp. 77-85). In tracing this expansion
Riemann also seeks precedents for his dualistic theories and (seemingly) finds
them in Zarlino and al-Schirazi. His explanation of the Messel theory in Studien
zur Geschichte der Notenschrift (pp. 77-78), for example, links the Arabian
theory almost immediately to his concept of undertones:
The basis for the Messel theory lies in a stretched string . . . which is
customarily divided into 12 equal parts.

XII
a I

XI X
I
I

IX VIII VII VI
I
I
I
I

V IV
I
I

III
I

II
I

I
I

P

Example 1N
If, for the string length B - I (= 1 the entire length) we assume, with
Kiesewetter [Die Musik der Araber (Leipzig, 1842), 25], the pitch g"', the
pitches of the series are as shown in Example 2N: that is, the undertones ...
from g"'[down] to the twelfth. Although it is bound to astonish us that the
undertone series has been made the basis of a tonal system-just as the over-

114

tone series, since Rameau, has been for us-the additional results are bound
to surprise us still more.
+9r

*

b?

~b

o

bo

II

II

II

II

*

1

II

II II
>
>= >
>

*

*

bo

II

II
x

II

II

O

II

Example 2N
These "additional results" of the theory include an overview (based on
Kiesewetter) of al-Schirazi's discussion of consonance and dissonance, including thirds and sixths among the consonant intervals. Riemann argues elsewhere
[Mickelsen, p. 110] that the Messel theory is probably much older than this
14th-century treatise, possibly from before the time of El Farabi (ca. 925); thus
the Arabs' recognition of thirds and sixths as consonances considerably predates Western recognition of these intervals as consonant.
Of course, modern scholarship disputes Riemann's conclusions. Mickelsen,
for example, takes Riemann to task (p. 41) on the issue of undertones, and even
the definition of the term, Messel, differs considerably from Riemann's Musiklexikon to Willi Apel's Harvard Dictionary (2nd ed.). The latter source gives
the following definition (s.v. "Messel"):
... a term used in Arab theory to indicate fractions of the type
4
5 tc. . .. It
(n + )/n, e.g.,
1)/n, e.g..
(n +
corresponds exactly to the Latin term
sesqui-. All intervals represented by such fractions were considered consonant by the Arabs. The messel has nothing to do with an early recognition
of the third or sixth as consonances. . . . the sixth () does not occur in this
series and hence is not a consonance.
19. The syntonic comma is usually expressed as 1 of a whole tone; it is unclear why
Riemann says !1. Perhaps Riemann based his calculations upon cents; the syn1
proxi -ately equal to 10
20. Riemann's notation here graphically shows the number of commas by which
two pitches of the same letter-name differ. He explains the system clearly in
The Nature of Harmony (Riemann/Fillmore, pp. 26-27):
Hauptmann's letter notation distinguishing the third-related from the fifthrelated tones has been improved upon by Helmholtz and von Oettingen so

115

as to distinguish underthirds and overthirds; thirds related in the first from
those related in the second degree, and so on ... Instead of using large and
small letters, the mark - is invariably used to indicate the comma (80:81).
Thus e is a comma lower than e; a is a comma higher than al, ct is two
commas lower than ct, etc.
21. See the appendix of tables in Renate Imig, Systeme der Funktionsbezeichnung
in den Harmonielehren seit Hugo Riemann (Diisseldorf, 1970), 231-265; Riemann's table appears on pp. 258-259. Manfred Wagner's discussion of Weber's
Tonartverwandtschaften,pp. 170-171 of Die Harmonielehren der ersten Hdlfte
des 19. Jahrhunderts (Regensburg, 1974), contains similar tables. Finally,
Lewin proposes as one of his musical spaces a modular harmonic space, very
much like Riemann's, in Generalized Musical Intervals and Transformations, p.
21.
22. Presumably, Riemann means by "pure-fifth related to C" those tonalities that
may be reached by direct fifth progression from the tonic, or its dominant or
subdominant. Riemann uses the I to symbolize minor tonic primes.
23. Apparently, Riemann is forced to select E as the generating tone because of his
view of the minor triad, despite the fact that A clearly plays the analogous role
to the C of the major scheme.
24. Referring to Figure 5, it may be seen that four-comma Gx and three-comma B#
would indeed be added to the tops of the fourth and fifth columns after the C
column as a result of dominants of these new keys; however, the minor subdominants that Riemann describes are already present in Figure 5 in the C, G
and D under-third columns.
25. That Riemann subscribed to the idea of key characteristics is clear from this
passage. His definition in the Musiklexikon (trans., Shedlock, s.v. "character of
keys") asserts that the key characteristics are aesthetic in nature and do not
depend on unequally tempered sounds. While the keys of C major and A minor
are plain and simple, "the deviations on the upper-tone side (# keys) appear
more intense, clearer, more brilliant; those on the under-tone side (b keys) relaxing, more sombre, more veiled." He adds that there is a further aesthetic
effect depending upon whether the key is major or minor: "major sounds clear,
minor sombre." The key characteristics to which Riemann refers in his analysis
of the Well-Tempered Clavier [Katechismus der Fugen-Komposition (Leipzig,
1890-1894), volumes 1 and 2 containing analyses of the "Well-Tempered Clavier" and volume 3, an analysis of the "Art of the Fugue"] are much more elaborate, however. His premise is that Bach's choice of thematic material is
governed by the character of the key in which each composition is written.
From volume 1, for example [Analysis of J. S. Bach's WohltemperirtesClavier
by Dr. H. Riemann, 2 vols., trans. J.Shedlock (London, 190?)]:
The key of F-minor- sombre both by its minor character, and by its position on the undertone side of the fundamental scale (key of the under-third
of A-minor)-yet, standing in close relationship to the fundamental major
scale (C), and commanding the C-major chord as dominant, it receives a
consoling ray of light-is one of the most melancholy of keys. It does not
express sorrow as deep as that of Eb-minor, nor passion as morbid as that of

116

withdeeperfeeling,greatersolemnity,penCt-minor,but it is impregnated
siveness, introspection, than almost any other key. ...

(p. 76)

on
An excellentsource of furtherinformation this subjectis Rita Steblin'sA
History of Key Characteristicsin the Eighteenth and Early Nineteenth Centuries

(Ann Arbor, 1983), which gives numerouschartsby a varietyof authorsdeassociatedwith variouskeys, as well as the historical
tailingthe characteristics
contextfor these ideas.
"root
26. The followingsteps are read "rootof the tonic to fifthof the dominant,"
of the tonic to thirdof the dominant,"
etc.

117

