Yale University Department of Music

Schenker and Improvisation
Author(s): John Rink
Source: Journal of Music Theory, Vol. 37, No. 1 (Spring, 1993), pp. 1-54
Published by: Duke University Press on behalf of the Yale University Department of Music
Stable URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/843943
Accessed: 16/12/2009 06:37
Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of JSTOR's Terms and Conditions of Use, available at
http://www.jstor.org/page/info/about/policies/terms.jsp. JSTOR's Terms and Conditions of Use provides, in part, that unless
you have obtained prior permission, you may not download an entire issue of a journal or multiple copies of articles, and you
may use content in the JSTOR archive only for your personal, non-commercial use.
Please contact the publisher regarding any further use of this work. Publisher contact information may be obtained at
http://www.jstor.org/action/showPublisher?publisherCode=duke.
Each copy of any part of a JSTOR transmission must contain the same copyright notice that appears on the screen or printed
page of such transmission.
JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide range of
content in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and facilitate new forms
of scholarship. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.

Duke University Press and Yale University Department of Music are collaborating with JSTOR to digitize,
preserve and extend access to Journal of Music Theory.

http://www.jstor.org

SCHENKER AND IMPROVISATION

JohnRink
This article has two sections. Part I investigates Heinrich Schenker's theoretical notion of improvisation and assesses its historical
context. Part II contains three analyticalcase-studies designed to evaluate Schenker's ideas on this subject.
I. Schenker's Notion of "Improvisation"
I wouldnot presumeto say how inspiration
comes upon the genius, to
declare with any certaintywhich part of the middleground foreor
the
groundfirstpresentsitself to his imagination: ultimatesecretswill
alwaysremaininaccessibleto us. (Schenker1979, 9)1
Creationmay have its origin anywhere,in any suitablevoice-leading
level or tone-succession; seed, by the grace of God, remainsinacthe
cessible even to metaphysics.(Ibid., 18)
Schenker'stheoretical works contain numerouspassages such as these
which reveal his passionate interest in the nature of compositional
conception and the "mystery of the creative moment [Geheimnis des
Schopfungsaugenblickes]"
(1925, 102-3). Although unable to explain
precisely how the great masters conceived their music, Schenker nevertheless claims that the act of tonal composition depends on the composer's sense of the fundamental structure, which is "ever present"
in the creative process, accompanying "each transformation in the
1

middleground and foreground, as a guardian angel watches over a
child" (1979, 18). As if to answer the question asked by some critics"But did the masters also know about all this?" (see Schenker 1979,
xxii)--he states: "The secret of balance in music ultimately lies in the
constant awareness of the transformationlevels and the motion from
foreground to background or the reverse. This awareness accompanies the composer constantly; without it, every foreground would degenerate into chaos" (1979, 18).
Schenker employs numerous metaphors to capture the "mystery"
of compositional conception. He frequently alludes to the "organic"
characterof great music, which "grows outward from within" like the
human body (1979, 6). "Aural flight [fliegendOhr]" enables composers to conceive extended musical spans as unified compositional statements, as does their "remarkable improvisatory long-range vision
[genial improvisierendeWeitsicht]"(1979, 6). With regard to sonata
form, Schenker observes:
The masterswere blessed with the abilityconstantlyto live and move
withinthe realmof prolongation the formaldivision.Thusthey were
of
able to traversethe path of the expositionwith giant strides, as if improvising,creatingthereby the effect of a dramaticcourse of action.
(1979, 136)
The link in this passage between compositional unity and improvisation indicates the extraordinarysignificance Schenker attaches to
the latter in many of his publications, as his reference to "improvisatory long-range vision" also demonstrates. Even a cursory glance at
his writings-particularly later ones like Das Meisterwerk,where he
claims that "only what is composed with the sweep of improvisation
[aus dem Stegreif]guarantees unity in a composition" (1977, 39),2 and
Derfreie Satz, where he defines "genius" as "the gift of improvisation
and long-range hearing [Weithoren]" (1979, 18)-reveals the frequency and conviction with which Schenker uses the term to describe
the act of composition and to define musical structure.
Although the importance of "improvisation"in Schenkerian theory cannot be more evident, it is not clear-nor has it ever been fully
established-how literally Schenker used the term, what specific connection he saw between the act of improvisation and the act of composition, and whether or not he intended to relate his theoretical
notion to historical practices. That Schenker'sconception of the term
evolved in the thirty-one years spanninghis first major work, Ein Beitragzur Ornamentik,and Derfreie Satz makes it especially difficultto
grasp.
The 1904 ornamentation essay (revised and reissued in 1908) attempts above all to "rehabilitate"the music of C. P. E. Bach, under2

valued at the time because of changes in taste and performance
practice, but Schenker also attackscontemporarytheorists who regard
music exclusively in terms of its form and who claim that even the
great masters composed according to preconceived formal principles.
We perceivethat any kind of schematicformulais foreignto their genius and that a natural spontaneity characterizes their creative
activity.... The music of these geniuses is unconfined,and is but
lightlychainedto the eternallaws of nature[nursanftan ewige, ihnen
Gesetzeder Naturgekettet].(1976, 34)
unbewuf3te
He specificallycites the freedom with which C. P. E. Bach composed:
Whatfirststrikesone about Bach'scompositional
techniqueis the absence of any kind of schematicformula, whether in regardto form,
idea, or harmony.To inventsomethingin advance,in isolationandout
of context, only to insert it into a strainedpatchworklater on-this
does not lie in his nature.Instead, everything-at its inceptionas well
as duringits successivedevelopment-exists by graceof an improvisatory imagination[improvisierende
Phantasie].(1976, 27)
He also praises the "richness of ideas" that bestows on Bach's works
"the gift of sounding spontaneous-eternally improvised [das EwigImprovisierte]"(1976, 33).
A passing observation reveals that Schenker interprets "improvisation" in this early essay not only as a metaphor for spontaneity,
compositional freedom, and abundant ideas, but also in a distinctly
historical context: citing Bach's advice to performers unable to "introduce elaborations"of fermatasand cadences, he comments, "I fear
that this passage is even more appropriatetoday, since improvisatory
playing has seen more decline than improvement since Bach's time"
(1976, 49).3 His remarkimplies that the demise of improvisationin the
nineteenth century precipitated a decline in compositional technique,
that is, the ability to compose not according to form but spontaneously, and to effect a synthesis.
In Harmonielehre, published in 1906, Schenker again relates improvisation to composition. The book ends with a discussion of two
improvisatorytraditions-modulating and preluding-in which Schenker criticizestheorists who represent modulations and preludes as simple, unrealized harmonies, as "the empty shells of the tones [leere
Tonhilsen]" (1954, 337). "A real modulation looks somewhat different" (1954, 338):
modulatingand preluding-even in the most primitivecase of a study
of
example!-should show all the characteristics a free composition,
viz., a freelyinventedmotif, free andvariegatedrhythm,as well as the
3

harmonictools offered by the diatonicsystem, the principleof combination,chromatic
changeandalteration,and, finally,free step progression, with its inherentpeculiarpsychology.(1954, 336)4
Even though a simple progression may serve as the harmonic foundation of an improvised modulation or prelude, in itself it lacks musical meaning: only elaboration accordingto compositional principles
will transformit into music.
In an importantcomment on compositional process, Schenker suggests that the great masters conceived and realized similar harmonic
skeletons in the act of composition:
It may not be useless, therefore,to keep presentgood exampleswhen
we elaborateplans for modulatingand preluding[Modulationsoder
Praludienpldne]
-especially with regardto motif and rhythm.Suchexamplesaboundin the worksof our masters,even if the composer'sintention may not have been that of setting an example. (1954, 338-39)
To support his claim, he cites passages from the works of J. S. Bach,
C. P. E. Bach, and Mozart, speculating,
Who knows,furthermore,
whetherthe methodof modulating preand
as I conceiveit would not incite the student'simagination,
renluding
who knowswhetherthe
deringit both morefluidandmore self-reliant;
generaluse of this method, extendedto all students,would not create
a situationwherethe artistwouldbe able to improvise
freely, as he was
wont to do in other times. I, for one, do not have the slightestdoubt
that the securityof the composer'stechniquewould stand to gain by
this method. (1954, 338; compareSchenker1912, xxxv)
Herein lies the connection Schenker sees between composition and
improvisation: both require the elaboration of harmonic "plans."
Good compositional technique presupposes the ability to realize such
"plans" as if through improvisation.
Schenker's references to compositional "plans" in his 1910 edition
of J. S. Bach's ChromaticFantasy and Fugue have somewhat different
implications. Here he states that
Bach wrote only a few fantasias;their form, while it tended to differ
from work to work, was always well defined. Later, C. P. E. Bach,
to
Mozart,and Beethovenoften used a certainplan [Hauptform] great
advantage: they wrote fantasias in which short, homophonic segments-self-contained and nicely roundedoff- alternatedwith transitional passagework or preludingmaterial.(1984, 23)
Although these comments seem to contradictthe 1904 essay on ornamentation (where Schenker asserts that the masters followed no pre4

conceived compositional plans or forms), this apparent discrepancy
reveals an evolution in Schenker's thoughts on improvisation.
Whereas before he attributed to the "improvisatoryimagination" of
the masters their freedom from formal constraint, he now acknowledges that these composers followed a "well-defined"form, a "certain
plan," even in writing improvisatoryworks such as fantasias.
At the start of the edition, Schenker analyzes the Fantasy's harmonic structureand suggests that Bach might have employed this as a
compositional model. Noting that "the inherent characteristicsof passage work and recitative writing" could have led to "aimless and irrational" tonal procedures (1984, 23), he explains that Bach achieves
tonal coherence in the Fantasy by frequent and judicious references to
the dominant harmony, as well as to the tonic and subdominant.5Subtle statements of D minor's principal harmonies act as structuralpillars that support "the boldest feats of modulation" (Spitta's phrase) in
a work "that seems (but only seems) to be entirely chromaticand even
atonal" (1984, 24). By attributing such importance to these harmonies, Schenker defines an essential element of what he would later
have called the Fantasy's background structure.6 Although significantly different from the Ursatz of mature Schenkerian theory, this
"background"is elaborated by Bach according to certain principles
that foreshadow the technique of Auskomponierung.7
In Der Tonwille, Schenker more closely links the plans of improvisatory compositions such as this to the backgroundstructure of his
mature theory, although as yet his consideration of the relationship
between improvisationand composition is neither exhaustive nor systematic. In a 1921 article, "Der Urlinie: Eine Vorbemerkung,"he discusses the fundamentalline (at this stage, only vaguely like the Urlinie
as later defined) for the first time. He attributes to it the "whole inspiration" of a work: "It is the muse that inspires all improvisatory
creation and all synthesis" (1921, 23; translation from Jonas 1982,
131). In a later issue, he writes that only "the feeling of the fundamental line" enabled the great masters to base their art of Auskomponierung and synthesis-as well as "the consistent logic in the
transformationof their prolongations"-on improvisation.8
In other Tonwillearticles, Schenker cites examples of the way "improvisatory inspiration" ensures the structural integrity of a work,
showing how a remote structure, specifically the fundamental line,
shapes more immediate events in the music. Referring to Haydn's Sonata in Eb major, H.XVI:52, he writes that the Urlinie'smotion transcends the "storm"of activity generated by a thirty-second-note run:
"The boldness of such improvisationresults in great organic power!"9
He identifies a similarconnection in Beethoven's Op. 2, No. 1 and enthuses about the "improvisatoryart of the young master."'0
5

Although his references to improvisation in Der Tonwille mostly
concern the improvisatoryconnection of the remote and the immediate through the fundamental line (which acts as a work's structural
skeleton), Schenker again employs the term with specific historical
resonances, suggesting a literal interpretationof what might otherwise
have appeared merely as abstraction. In a 1923 essay he observes:
natureof [J. S.] Bach's music is totally and fundathe improvisatory
in contradiction
with the over-fasttempos in vogue today.
mentally
Can it not be said that virtuallyall of Bach'smusicrelies on improvisatorycreation?Obviouslythe currentinabilityto improvise
handicaps
the modern musicianin his attempt even to approachthe unpreceart
dented improvisatory of a Bach. .. .11
In another article from 1923, Schenker discusses Beethoven's metronome markingsand again relates historicaltraditionsof improvisation
to his apparently "theoretical" concept (1923b, 53; see also 1922b, 3,
10, 11; 1923b, 55).
Schenker thoroughly defines his notion of improvisation for the
first time in his 1925 essay "Die Kunst der Improvisation," from the
first Meisterwerkyearbook. He studies the final chapter ("Von der
freyen Fantasie") in C. P. E. Bach's Versuch uber die wahre Art das
Clavier zu spielen, and then analyzes the free fantasy at the close of
the Versuch, as well as two works by Handel. Schenker concludes his
essay with the comment:
The consciousawarenesswith whichour geniusesmasteredtonal materialin this mannerenabledthem to createcomprehensive
syntheses.
Their works are not merely pieced together, but are sketchedout inlike
stantaneously the free fantasyand are developedfrom a mysterious fundamental
source [Urgrund].12
Schenker makes two important points in this essay. First, even
works as improvisatory in character as the free fantasy can have a
comprehensible structure, for the great masters improvised with a
"basicplan" in mind which helped them achieve coherence. A feature
not only of improvisationbut also of composition, that plan-"instantaneously sketched out" by a composer-comprises something like a
background or middleground structure (specifically, an "Urgrund"),
whose integrity and "surenessof course [Sicherheitdes Weges]"(1925,
32) derive entirely from the fundamental line. (In his analysis of the
C. P. E. Bach Fantasy, Schenker relates to an Urliniethe partimentolike plan specified by Bach as the "skeleton" [das Gerippe] of the
work, which the composer fleshes out according to the principles of
thoroughbass, thereby creating an apparently "free" but nonetheless
logical composition.)13
6

Second, the "realization [Ausfuhrung]"of the "basic plan" takes
place through diminution, which Schenker calls "the principalmeans
of the free fantasy."14He relates improvisation and composition by
implying the importance of diminution as the latter's "basic law
[Grundgesetz]"(1925, 11). Just as the art of diminutioninfluences the
improvisatory embellishment of fermatas and cadences, and just as
diminution shapes the realization of a "basic plan" in more extensive
improvised works, so, too, does it guide the unfolding of a composition from a remote structure.Diminution thus serves as the "principal
means" of composition and improvisation alike. Schenker highlights
numerous diminutionsin the three works he analyzes, demonstrating
the connection between remote and immediate levels that they effect.
He writes with particularenthusiasm about the Bach Fantasy:
The beauty of the realization[of Bach's plan] thus lies in the "adherence" to a smallerarpeggiation-motive
withinthe large arpeggiation,
and in the concealmentof this connectionby a run whichpretendsto
be wanderingaimlessly[in keeping with the improvisatory
nature of
the free fantasy]but neverthelessachievesa specificgoal.15
In "Vom Organischen der Sonatenform," from the second Meisterwerkyearbook, Schenkerreiterates and expands on these points, as
well as ideas from earlier essays. The "basic plan" derived from improvisation now embraces both the fundamental line and the bass
arpeggiation-in other words, the entire Ursatz, which ensures compositional unity through the "sweep of improvisation." Reviving a
topic broached in Ein Beitragzur Ornamentik,he proposes in a savage
attack on proponents of sonata form that improvisationalone endows
composers with the freedom to create organic structures:"the whole
must be discovered through improvisation if the piece is to be more
than a collection of individual parts and motives in the sense of a
schema" (1977, 39).
Finally, Schenker addresses an issue raised in "Die Kunst der
Improvisation," where he stated that the masters "instantaneously
sketched out" their compositions. Referring to remote connections
created by concealed arpeggiations in Haydn's Sonata in G minor,
H.XVI:44, he now writes: "Would it have been possible for Haydn to
compose both arpeggiationsin such a manner if the sweep of improvisation [Stegreifwurflhad not shown him the way? . .. Surely this
idea must have necessarilybeen present from the first"(1977, 43).16In
other words, at the very inception of the composition, Haydn's improvisatoryinspirationwould have defined the remote structureof the
entire work, if not its immediate realization.
In Der freie Satz, Schenker elaborates this notion of "improvisatory inspiration"and once again disparages sonata-form theorists for
7

ignoring truly organic connection. Having noted the "giant strides"
with which the masters could "traversethe path of the exposition ...
as if improvising," he writes:
The qualityof improvisation
evident in the worksof the greatmasters
makes it impossibleto conceive of an intellectualand chronological
separationbetween a so-calledfirst and second theme. All of the examplesI have shown clearlydemonstratethe organicprocessand the
breadthof scope inherentin the initial concept. (1979, 138).
To support his claim that the masters conceived their works as compositional entities from the start, he cites relevant testimonies of
C. P. E. Bach, Haydn, Mozart, Beethoven, and Brahms, indicating
more precisely than in earlier essays how improvisatoryexpertise enhances compositional technique: "The great masters took the background as their source of memory. Improvisationcertainly gave their
memory greater strength, but the ability to improvise depends, to a
great extent, upon memory," that is, upon the background (1979,
128). Furthermore, "the ability in which all creativity begins-the
to
ability to compose extempore [Stegreifkomposition], improvise fantasies and preludes-lies only in a feeling for the background, middleground, and foreground" (1979, 6).17
*

*

*

This survey of Schenker'swritingsreveals that his notion of improvisation rests upon two principles:first, like composition itself, the act
of improvisation involves the prolongation of a remote structure-a
"basic plan" or model-which is linked directly to the middleground
or background; second, the prolongation of that structure in improvisation takes place through diminution, specifically, diminution of
the fundamental line.
The two principles-and indeed all of Schenker's ideas on the
subject-presuppose certain characteristics of improvisation that
should be carefullyassessed. Can it be assumed that his understanding
of improvisationas practiced in the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries was accurate?It is odd, and not altogether convincing, that Schenker should attribute powers of synthesis to improvisation, when all
evidence suggests that it permitted an audacious flouting of compositional "rules" and even thrived on harmonic and formal license. One
has only to look at accounts of improvisation in the early nineteenth
century to discover what Robert Wangermee (1950, 230) calls the
"lack of perfect logic," the "rapid abandonment of certain ideas for
8

the sake of new and contrasting ones," and the "absence of internal
structure"that apparentlyprevailed.
In the early nineteenth century, improvisation suffered an "apotheosis of bad taste."18 Extemporaneous performanceswere marked
by abrupt, often exaggerated changes in key, tempo, mood, and thematic material, which, used for dramatic effects of an "immediate"
nature, would have been wholly inappropriatein compositions.19Furthermore, players arbitrarilyinterrupted "serious" works with meretricious virtuosic displays, as Liszt confesses in an eloquent mea culpa
about his early career:
I then frequentlyperformed... the worksof Beethoven, Weberand
Hummel,andI confessto my shamethatin orderto compelthe bravos
of an audiencealwaysslow to graspbeautifulthingsin theiraugustsimplicity,I had no scruplesagainstchangingtheirtemposand intentions;
I even went so far as insolentlyto add to them a host of passagesand
cadenzas....

([1837] 1980, 9:49)

Improvisationin the mid- to late eighteenth century also relied on
formal freedom and the element of surprise, as Peter Schleuning
(1971; 1973) discerns from numerous improvisatoryworks from the
period. He catalogs characteristicfeatures such as the "extreme modulations" effected by blocks of arpeggios in "composed improvisations" by Johann Ludwig Krebs, C. P. E. Bach, Ernst Wilhelm Wolf,
Johann ChristophKellner, and ChristianGottlob Neefe; sudden shifts
to "very distant keys" (Kellner and Johann Christian Kittel); unexpected interrupted cadences (Mozart); and, above all, enharmonic
changes (Kellner, Johann Wilhelm Hassler, and C. P. E. Bach). Yet,
despite these "original and suitably novel harmonic traits" (1971,
2:11) and the appearance of disorder, much of the improvisatory
music from the period seems to have obeyed the fundamentalprinciples of tonal "logic" and "grammar"embodied in thoroughbasspractice. Schleuning emphasizes the balance between order and disorder
implicit in C. P. E. Bach's term verniinftigeBetrugerey, or "rational
deception," employed in the final chapter of the Versuch.20
The extent to which verniinftigeBetrugereyenshape eighteenthcentury improvisatory works is evident in Mozart's Fantasy in C
minor, K. 475, which Schleuning calls a "masterworkof formal 'deception' " (1971, 2:13). The piece starts with a descending sequence
typical of the genre, except that its goal-the dominant-is unexpectedly avoided: the descent is reversed in m. 8, and it is not until m. 14
that V7 appears, although even here the chromaticmotion in the bass
carries on to Gb so that a definitive statement of the dominant is denied. Later, the G major of mm. 18-21 functions contextually not as
9

V but as the submediant of B minor, again frustratingthe listener's
expectations.
The unfulfilled drive toward the dominant,21which achieves its
goal only near the end of the work during the dramatic"recitativoaccompagnato" that begins twenty measures before the Tempo primo
(appropriately, this is the work's emotional crux-compare the recitative in J. S. Bach's Chromatic Fantasy [see also Bach 1949, 153]),
effectively subordinateswhat might otherwise seem the two most harmonically stable passages in the piece: the D-major section (mm.
26ff.) and the Andantino, in Bb major. Despite the superficialappearance of a "changing-note"harmonic structure-C minor -> D major
-> B, major -, C minor (see ex. 1)-the Fantasy depends for coherence on the more fundamental motion from tonic to dominant transcending the "changing-note"progression. Mozart exploits the effects
of this large-scale "rationaldeception" throughoutthe Fantasy: much
of the work's drama derives from the withholding of V in several significant passages and at different structurallevels. In mm. 78-81, for
instance, one expects the sustained diminished chord on F# to resolve
to V, thus articulatingthe "formal closing cadence" on the dominant
or other principal harmony normally found in the middle of eighteenth-century free fantasies (see Bach 1949, 434). Such a resolution
would dissipate the underlying tension caused by the delay of the
dominant earlier in the piece (see exx. 1 and 2). Instead, however, the
diminished harmony moves in m. 82 to V7 of Bb major, and although
this preparesfor the Andantino (at the same time closing the harmonic
gap left by the abortive F-major theme in mm. 56ff.), the listener must
wait even longer for the dominant. This makes the arrivalon V all the
more powerful when it finally occurs in the "recitative."
In K. 475's balance between superficial disorder and a concealed
but nonetheless rational structurelies not only an importantprinciple
of improvisationas practiced by Mozart and other eighteenth-century
composers, but also the key to understanding "improvisation" in
Schenkeriantheory. That Schenker grasped verniinftigeBetriigereyas
a central principle of improvisationis clear from the first Meisterwerk
yearbook, where he marvels at C. P. E. Bach's "bold tricks [verwegene Kunste]"and writes: "Bach insists on the most precise order even
in the diminution of a free fantasy, but conceals this order under the
appearance of disorder purely for the sake of the fantasy .. ."22
On the strength of these comments, the Meisterwerkstudy in general, and the two principles of improvisation articulatedin nearly all
his works, one inevitably reaches the conclusion that Schenker derived his notion of improvisationlargely, if not entirely, from C. P. E.
Bach, in other words, from an eighteenth-centurytradition rooted in
thoroughbasspractice. His references in Ein Beitrag zur Ornamentik
10

26

m. I

56

78

82

86

149 161

136

168

"changing-notestructure"
thwarted
resolution

-'
C-minor
introduction

,

rC

-_ 1.

V
_ Bb-major "recitativo
D-major abortive
theme
theme
accompagnato"
F-major V and
theme
"formal
closing
cadence"
avoided

11
C-minor + Coda
reprise

V

i

i-V-i structure

Example 1. Mozart, Fantasy in C minor, K. 475. "Changing-note"
and i-V-i structures.

3

3

tl

( iy

-

V r,

IVb7
(=vii07 of V)

V V7 of Bb major

Example 2. Mozart, Fantasy in C minor, K. 475, mm. 78-83.
and the Ninth Symphony monograph to the decline of improvisation
since Bach's time offer further evidence that nineteenth-century traditions contributed little, if anything, to his understandingof improvisation.
The virtually exclusive nature of Schenker's reliance on the Versuch means that one must consider (if only briefly in this context)
11

whether Bach accurately represents the eighteenth-century tradition
of improvisationin the final chapter of his Essay,23in order to gauge
the general validity of Schenker'stwo principlesand their relevance to
the works of other composers. Most German treatises contemporary
with the Versuch adopt thoroughbass methods similar to Bach's for
the instruction of improvisation. For instance, in his Anleitung zur
practischen Musik, Johann Petri assigns to thoroughbass the role of
compositional "etymology" and (to some extent) "syntax,"24adducto
ing "the most common" figured progressions25 be realized by the
student as the plans of improvised preludes and transitions between
works in different keys. Treatises by Jacob Adlung (1758), Georg
Sorge ([1767]), August Kollmann (1792), Johann Vierling (1794), and
others26also stress that the rules of thoroughbassshould be upheld in
improvisation, and furthermore that the extemporaneous realization
of a figured bass line should prominently feature imitation (or "diminution", to use Schenker's term) in order to effect coherence. Finally, just as C. P. E. Bach (and, for that matter, Schenker) claimed,
improvisation should satisfy the requirements of order and logic implicit in good compositional technique. On the whole, however, these
authors do not provide the "basic plans" of fully worked-out free fantasies as Bach does in the Versuch:they concentrate instead on short
modulatory passages and preludes, typically offering only rudimentary improvisatorymodels like ascending or descending scales.27One
must look outside Germany for traditions of improvising complete
pieces analogous to C. P. E. Bach's.28
Although performance treatises in the first part of the nineteenth
century (like their eighteenth-century precursors) link improvisation
to composition and stress the importance of imitation, other features
denote fundamental changes in improvisatorypractice.29In his SystematischeAnleitung zum Fantasierenauf dem Pianoforte, published
c. 1830, Carl Czerny likens "a fantasy well done ... to a beautiful English garden, seemingly irregular, but full of surprisingvariety, and
executed rationally, meaningfully, and according to plan" (1983, 2).
Although Czerny implies that nineteenth-centurypreludes still rely on
the
the principles of thoroughbass,30 "plan" referred to here-that is,
the "plan" of a fantasy-significantly differs from the thoroughbass
outlines that served as the basis of much eighteenth-centuryimprovisation; moreover, it has little relation to Schenker's Urgrund(that is,
a background or middleground structure). Czerny's comments indicate that after 1820 or so, the improvisationof large-scale genres such
as fantasies depended primarilyon thematicmodels, in other words,
preconceived formal schemes-rondo form, polonaise form, and sonata form, to name but a few of those cited in the treatise-either used
12

singly or successively juxtaposed within a fantasy to form the whole
(see Carew 1981, 1:209ff.). That these thematic constructs assumed
such importance in nineteenth-century improvisation lends greater
credence to Schenker's view of music history: as Schleuning demonstrates in a detailed study of the free fantasy (1973; see especially pp.
350-68), the reliance on form in improvisation effectively shackled
creative freedom, precipitated the disappearanceof the free fantasy,
and hastened the decline of improvisation in general.31Without the
inherently musical logic of thoroughbass-derivedsyntax, improvisation-as well as composition-lost its capacity for "rational deception": the extreme contrasts which in an earlier era had had such
effect became little more than musical solecisms devoid of dramatic
power.
In view of the significantgulf between eighteenth- and nineteenthcentury improvisatory traditions, it is tempting to take up the challenge Schenker poses in Derfreie Satz, where he comments, "it would
be of [the] greatest importance today to study thoroughly the fantasies, preludes, cadenzas, and similar embellishment which the great
composers have left to us" (1979, 7). Schenker's writings reveal that
his notion of improvisation derives from an eighteenth-century
practice-that is, from the work of C. P. E. Bach. But if the masters
of composition are "lightly chained to the eternal laws of nature,"
then their improvisatory works, no matter when they were written,
should in some way reflect Schenker'stwo principlesof improvisation,
and more generally his principles of free composition. An important
analytical undertakingwould be to determine whether the composed
masters were "organically"conimprovisationsof nineteenth-century
ceived despite the widespread influence of formal models on improvisatory works during this period. If they can be shown to possess
integrated background, middleground, and foreground structures,
then "improvisation" in Schenkerian theory will clearly have more
comprehensive meaning than its eighteenth-century origins suggest.
II. Analytical Case-Studies: Beethoven, Schubert, Chopin
However valiant one's desire "to study the fantasies, preludes, cadenzas, and similar embellishment" of the great masters, it is by no
means easy to identify an appropriatebody of repertoire for an evaluation of Schenker's principles of improvisation, given the degree to
which improvisatory practices changed in the early nineteenth century. As the free fantasy lost its central role in extemporaneousmusicmaking, to be replaced by improvisationbased (in Vanhulst's words)
13

on "the strictest forms of musical composition,"32the stylistic implications of the generic title "fantasy"paradoxicallygrew less precise:
the genre became remarkablypermeable, encompassing such disparate phenomena as opera potpourris and sonatas. It is important,
therefore, to ensure that any works studied here are genuine "composed improvisations" and not fantasies in name only: that is, they
should be either notated improvisations (as contemporary critics regarded the first work to be analyzed, Beethoven's Op. 77) or based
largely on stylistic features-for instance, unorthodox tonal relationships and abrupt foreground contrasts-closely approximatingthose
of actual improvisations (the Schubert and Chopin fantasies under
considerationfall into this category). Furthermore,to test Schenker's
principles, which are of course the very basis of his theory of musical structure, virtually requires one to limit the analytical sample to
works by nineteenth-century composers within the Schenkerian
canon-Beethoven, Schubert, Chopin, Mendelssohn, Schumann, and
Brahms. Only the first three wrote improvisatorypieces suitable for
our study, as the fantasies of the remainingtrio are perhaps too "compositional" in nature to warrantinvestigation into the presence of an
"improvisatory"genesis, or structure, or both. A final issue concerns
the existence of sketches, which could shed light on the music's inception and allow us to judge whether or not the "improvisatorylongrange vision" hailed by Schenker actually shaped the compositional
process. Therefore, Part II is based principallyon works for which at
least some sketch material survives: Beethoven's Op. 77, Schubert's
Fantasy in F minor, D. 940, and Chopin's Polonaise-Fantasy,Op. 61.
I also discuss Schubert's "Wanderer" Fantasy, D. 760 and, briefly,
Chopin's Barcarolle, Op. 60. In each of the case-studies, I propose
hypothetical "improvisatory"models and provide more or less detailed background or middleground graphs of the finished compositions. The Polonaise-Fantasysketches are discussed at length, as these
reveal a multiplicity of "basic plans" that might have guided Chopin
at different stages in writing the piece.
A. Beethoven: Fantasy, Op. 77
By all accounts, Beethoven possessed extraordinary powers as
an improviser: the impact of his improvisations seems to have been
profound, even overwhelming. Czerny's detailed descriptions of
Beethoven's extemporaneous playing are unusually insightful. His
comments, which betray the "formal" musical thought discussed in
Part I, also allude to the influence improvisationhad on Beethoven's
compositions.
14

Beethovencould improvisein severalways, whetheron a theme of his
own choosingor on a suggestedtheme.
1. In the form of a first movementor rondo Finale of a Sonata. He
wouldplaya normalfirstsection, introducing secondmelody, etc., in
a
a relatedkey. In the second section, however, he gave full rein to his
inspiration,while retainingthe originalmotive, which he used in all
possibleways. Allegros were enlivenedby bravurapassages,manyof
whichwere even more difficultthan those found in his sonatas.
2. In free variationformssomewhatlike the ChoralFantasyOp. 80 or
the choralFinaleof the NinthSymphony;
both those pieces give a true
in
pictureof his improvising this manner.
3. In a mixedform, one idea followingthe other as in a potpourri,like
his Solo FantasyOp. 77. (1970, 15)
Published in 1810, Op. 77 might well have been based on the piano
fantasy Beethoven improvised at his celebrated concert on December
22, 1808 (see Cooper 1990, 13),33where the "ChoralFantasy," Op. 80
was premiered with Beethoven improvising the piano introduction.
Whether or not it derived from an actual improvisation, Beethoven
made sketches of the eventual Op. 77 before notating it in full. Only
some of these survive-specifically, two pages in the sketchbook
"Landsberg5" (Deutsche Staatsbibliothek,Berlin). Additional leaves
from Landsberg5 might also have been devoted to Op. 77, but these,
along with the so-called Petter bifolium (which also contained
sketches of the Fantasy: see Johnson, Tyson, and Winter 1985, 18094), are now lost. Transcriptionsof the bifolium do exist, however:
published by J. S. Shedlock in 1909, they are reproduced in ex. 3,
along with Nottebohm's transcription (1887, 274) of some of the
Landsberg 5 material.
Although only fragmentary,the sketched passages offer useful insight into Op. 77's genesis. The scales reproduced in ex. 3a are like
those in m. 221 of the finished composition (with only slight discrepancies), and the broken octaves appear in mm. 62-63. In Shedlock's
transcription(ex. 3b), similar broken octaves (from mm. 39-40) are
depicted, along with scales plus a final cadence (which differs from
that of the published work). There are also broken chords like those
in m. 90 and a version of the B-major theme firstheard in mm. 157-60
(possibly related to its final statement, in mm. 238-41). Of paramount
importance, however, are the direction-changingchords from m. 37
(given in outline) and from m. 78, which, accordingto Shedlock, follow "soon after" one another, perhaps indicating long-range structural planning on Beethoven's part: as we shall see, these are of
considerable significancein the finished composition.
15

#. r
h dur.\

0

7F\j.

[M#"4
N'[0]

r \J
c dur.

g dur.

\

rf\J
[

Example 3a: Beethoven, Fantasy, Op. 77. Transcriptionof sketches:
Nottebohm 1887, 274.
The literature on Op. 77 reveals a wide range of critical opinion.
Hugo Riemann (1910, 22) describes the piece as "die Fixierung einer
freien Improvisation,"while JiurgenOppen (1971) rather dismisses it
as a "joke." Other authors strive to show the work's fundamentalintegrity, despite its surface vagaries and sharp contrasts. For instance,
Jtirgen Uhde treats Op. 77 as a "carefully planned unity [sorgfaltig
geplanteZusammenhang]"(1968, 1:115) and demonstratessubtle motivic connections that extend throughout, although he acknowledges
that the key scheme, given as "g-f-Des-B-d-As-b-h-H"
(1968,
1:114), is "keine Systematik": indeed, he exclaims, the piece even
lacks a central tonality (see Cooper 1990, 25).34
Hugh Macdonaldexpresses a contrary,iconoclastic opinion in a diatribe against studies like those of Uhde and Bekker35which consecrate anachronistic notions of unity as an analytical premise. He
appeals instead for an "authentic criticism"that reconstructs"the attitudes and assumptions against which the composer was writing"
(1978, 149):
The only workable interpretation,it seems to me, is to regard the
piece's disunity, diversity,illogicality,inconsistenciesand contradictions as themselves the principal idea of the piece....

Here

Beethoven is taking a particular principle-the principle of disatunity-to an extreme, and would surelysmile at our well-meaning
temptsto find the structural
point of the work and our absurdtalk of
"progressive
tonality","innerunity"and the even more absurdsearch
for structural
seconds and structural
thirds. The point of the work is
that it has no structural
point. (1978, 145)
16

[implied key signature of 5 ,'s?]
Presto

Example 3b: Beethoven, Fantasy, Op. 77. Transcriptionof sketches:
Shedlock 1909, 712-13.
While efforts to demonstrate "organic" motivic unity may be unconvincing, the above conclusions seem equally implausible. Macdonald fails to differentiate between "unity" and "coherence,"36a subtle
distinction vital to the understandingof late-eighteenth- and earlynineteenth-century improvisatorymusic. Whether "organically"unified or not, Beethoven's Fantasy, Op. 77 is coherent in that it "hangs
together," its constituent parts do not "destroyor contradictthe rest,"
and it is perfectly intelligible. In short, it contrivesto work as a whole.
This is hardly surprising:there is no reason why Beethoven would deliberately have improvised haphazardly(all accounts suggest the contrary) or have published an incomprehensible work without any
"structuralpoint." Regarding the Fantasy as coherent rather than organically unified liberates the analyst from having defensively to justify the role of its more unorthodox features in a compositional
"organism," allowing one to focus instead on determining its unique
17

musical logic, which, though grammaticallysolecistic vis-a-vis those
architectonicnorms embodied in contemporarycompositions, nevertheless stems from a well-established improvisatorytradition. If, as
Macdonaldsuggests (1978, 150), Beethoven is "deliberatelydeceiving
us," we must consider whether it is "rational deception" that lies at
the heart of the work-in other words, whether for all its idiosyncracies the work relies upon those principles of tonal "grammar"and
"syntax"that informed C. P. E. Bach's free fantasies and that would
eventually influence Schenker's notion of improvisation. Answering
this question is one of the main goals of the following analysis.
A potentially fruitful analytical approach would be to pinpoint
major "landmarks,"for particularlystriking features could well have
structuralimportance:presumablyBeethoven intended contemporary
auditors to seize upon them first and foremost. The rapid scales that
call
open the work and recur in numerous contexts are a prominent37
to attention, especially when, as in only two places (before the Bb
theme and the C-major variation), they occur in both directionsdown and up-in an obvious clue to the listener that something significant follows. As in K. 475, relatively stable areas-of which there
are three-constitute another set of landmarks.At first the Bb theme
(mm. 15ff.) sounds like the beginning of the piece proper, following a
fourteen-bar introduction. Ushered in by the descending/ascending
scales, the theme gets "stuck" in the Eb chords in mm. 25-28, and in
m. 37 there is an abruptchange of direction, so that the initially stable
"main theme" is retrospectivelyunderstood as only a transientparenthesis in a much larger "capriccio." A second area of stability comes
with the lengthy, climactic build-up in V of B minor (mm. 90-156)
followed by the most stable part of the work: the theme and variations
in the tonic B major, which, as Jonas observes, is the main section
(Hauptteil)of the piece. A third stable area occurs within this "Hauptteil": the C-majorvariationin mm. 222-5. Although an interpolation,
this contains the work's most expressive music (in contrast to the
romping finale that follows, which is typical of the buoyant conclusions found in many early-nineteenth-century fantasies). Heralded by
the brief cadenza in m. 221 (in which the descending/ascendingscales
occur for only the second time), the C-major passage also stands out
as the only non-diatonic writing in the latter half of the work.
On the basis of these "landmarks," two formal scenarios can be
inferred, the second supersedingthe first as the piece unfolds. Initially
Op. 77 appears to be in Bb major: a short prelude leading through vi,
v, and bIII of Bb reaches the "tonic" in m. 15, whereupon one expects
a continuation in Bb. The chordal interruptionin m. 37, the brilliant
passageworkin m. 38, and the D-minor Allegro con brio in mm. 39-77
raise doubts about what will follow (such uncertaintybeing consistent
18

SCENARIO 1
Section: Prelude
Measures: 1-14

>

"Main Body," in "tonic" Bb,major
15ff.

>

"Interruption"
37

SCENARIO 2 (with retrospective reinterpretationof mm. 1-15ff.)
Section: "Fantasy-Prelude"- Main Body: Theme and Variations -> Finale + Coda
in tonic B major
229-38 238-45
1-156
157-228
Measures:

Figure 1. Beethoven, Fantasy, Op. 77. Two formal scenarios.

with the fantasy genre). Although the D-minor episode could fit into
a large-scale I-iii-V pattern in Bb major (whereupon a section in the
"dominant" F major would likely come next), the chords in m. 78
(analogous to those in m. 37) suspend any identifiable tonal allegiance, and at m. 90, when the Presto begins, Bb1major's status as
tonic is completely undermined. One's first impressionsof the workthat it begins with a brief prelude followed by the main body in Bb
major-are thus supplantedby a second scenario, in which a substantial "Fantasy-Prelude"leads to the "Hauptteil": the B-major theme
and variations(with C-majorinterpolation), finale, and coda. (See fig.
1.) Beethoven therefore bases the work on both a formal deception
(what is the main theme?) and a structural deception (what is the
key?).
It is entirely possible that the two formal scenarios worked in conjunction with the most significant tonal landmarks to constitute
Beethoven's "basic" plan in improvising (or composing) this piece.
Given that the stable tonal regions are Bb, major, B major, and C
major, and that the formal design is "Fantasy-Prelude"-> theme and
variations -> finale/coda, then a hypothetical improvisatory model
like the one in ex. 4 can be inferred, in which the motion from Bb to
B major is balanced by the C-major inflection. The quasi-symmetrical turning-figurestructure, which recalls K. 475's "changing-note"
scheme (although here Bb major and C major lack the diatonically
justifiable function that D major [V/V] and Bb major [IV/IV] possess
in Mozart's Fantasy), is fleshed out by means of the two principalunifying motives: the repeated-note figure (see note 37) and the allimportant scales (which, as mentioned earlier, Beethoven reserves to
highlightboth the source of large-scale formal deception and the most
expressive music-respectively, the Bb-major "main theme" and the
C-major variation).38
19

9C
s-

)K
4r

variouskeys,
but returning
to b/As in
B I/A#
bass

-V

C-major
variation
variation
expressive
goal

"Fantasy-Prelude"

theme and variations

finale and coda

Example 4. Beethoven, Fantasy, Op. 77. Hypothetical improvisatory
model, with principal tonal and formal areas.
m.15

88

142

157

221

229

A

A

A

A

A

5

4

3

2

1

Bg

7
I I
[#
v6
f----jr~ ^V6

"
r
I

V

I

Example 5. Beethoven, Fantasy, Op. 77. Background structure.
Just as background and middleground structures can be derived
from C. P. E. Bach's D-major Fantasy in the Versuchand the "basic
plan" on which it was constructed (see Schenker 1925, 21-30), it is
possible to analyze Op. 77 and ex. 4's hypothetical improvisatory
model in conventional hierarchicalterms. The backgroundstructure39
shown in ex. 5 is unorthodox in only a few respects: the head note S
enters in m. 88 long before the tonic harmony (which accompaniesthe
DO 3 at the start of an essentially self-contained descent through a
third); the 4 is harmonically unsupported, although in the piece
Beethoven takes such pains to stress and prolong it that it can be
viewed as a composed-out structuralpitch; and the background-level
semitonal relationship between the "harmonic appoggiatura" Bb
5)
major (enharmonicallyVII1 and B major is radical (but by no means
atypical of nineteenth-century improvisatory repertoire, as we shall
see in studying the Schubert and Chopin fantasies). In other respects,
however, an uncomplicated tonal structure operates in Op. 77, and
20

the fact that the fundamentalline spans so much of the piece enhances
synthesis. Beethoven's control of even the boldest improvisatoryfeatures via the hypothetical "basic plan" and the backgroundstructure
implicit therein is remarkable: his "improvisatorylong-range vision"
results in a perfectly coherent-if not organically unified-"FantasyPrelude" plus theme and variations.
B. Schubert: "Wanderer"Fantasy, D. 760
and Fantasy in F minor, D. 940
Schubert wrote at least eight fantasies, including the early piano
duets D. 1, 9, and 48 (1810-13); the solo Fantasy, D. 2e (which, composed in 1811, betrays a debt to Mozart's K. 475); the "Grazer"Fantasy, D. 605a (attributed to Schubert, although its provenance is
uncertain); the "Wanderer," D. 760 (1822); the Fantasy for Violin
and Piano, D. 934 (1827); and the Fantasy in F minor for Piano Duet,
D. 940 (1828).40The three mature works are of particularrelevance to
our evaluation of Schenker'sprinciplesof improvisation,especially D.
760 and 940. All three invoke the sonata principle within the fantasy
genre, this generic mix constituting what Arthur Godel (1979) calls
the "unique law [Eigengesetz]"of Schubert'sfantasies. Describing the
three works as "cyclical fantasy-sonatas [zyklische Fantasiesonaten]"
(1979, 199) based on a process of thematic variation, Godel links them
with Beethoven's two Sonatas quasi una fantasia, Op. 27, which, as
Peter Schleuning has shown (1973, 356ff.), heralded the end of the
free fantasy by establishingbetween sonata form and the fantasy style
an intimate bond that was exploited in the "improvisatory"works of
both contemporary and later composers, to the detriment of improvisation in general (see the discussion at the end of Part I). Godel
comments that the "fantastic"in these mature Schubertpieces derives
as much from the poetic-associative dimension as from the musical
material per se: indeed, from the standpoint of syntax and harmony,
there exists hardlyany difference between these fantasies and contemporaneous sonatas.41Such an observation is of course consistent with
the interpenetration of compositional and improvisatorystylistic features that characterizedthe music of the time (see Wangermee 1950,
252-53).
In D. 760 and 940, several subordinate formal patterns and/or
genres are integrated into the overall "cyclical fantasy-sonata"plan:
for instance, three-part song form in the F-minor;42theme and variations in D. 760's "slow movement"; scherzo-trio-scherzo in both
works; fugal writingin the two finales, where "strict"and "free" styles
21

are united; and, in the sketches of the F-minor,43a march (Tempo di
Marcia) in the trio rather than the familiar con delicatezza section.
The sketches of the later Fantasy (discussed in detail below) suggest
that these various formal and generic elements were part of Schubert's
original conception; the extent to which "improvisatory"principlesof
tonal structure also informed the compositional procedure is perhaps
less immediately obvious, although, as we shall observe, relevant information about tonal design can be gleaned from the sketch material.
In the case of D. 760, for which no sketches survive, determininghow
the music was conceived is considerably more difficult.
Analytical comparisonof the "Wanderer"and the F-minorhelps to
shed some light on this issue, which is central to the present investigation. In both works, Schubert exploits Neapolitan relationships at
a structurallevel, assigning to D. 760's four "movements" the keys
C major, C# minor (enharmonically equivalent to bii 5), Ab major
(IVI), and C major, while D. 940 is arranged symmetrically-F
minor, Fttminor (that is, l ii I), and F minor-whereby the bold tonal
juxtapositions between movements in Haydn's Sonata in Eb major,
H.XVI:52 operate within a single piece. In an admittedlycrude sense,
these key schemes could be regarded as Schubert's "basic plan" in
composing the two fantasies, in conjunction with the formal layouts
described above. Examples 6 and 7 depict background-leveltonal and
formal relationshipsin D. 760 and 940 respectively, showing hypothetical descents of the fundamental line within each finale. (In both
works, the structuralclose is handled fairly conventionally; detailed
middlegroundgraphs are thus not provided.) Note that in the "Wanderer" Schubertsoftens the progressionfrom I to bii 5 by means of an
applied V6 chord, while the F-minor Fantasy boasts an altogether
more daringharmonicjuxtaposition at this level. Brown describes the
transitionfrom the "firstmovement" to the Largo as "abrupt, almost
gauche," and he claims that the scherzo and reprise are "simply
pasted together"-a "scissors-and-pastejoin" (1966, 91 and 95). No
matter how stark these juxtapositions seem in the background, however, Schubert carefully prepares for them at lower structurallevels,
creating a web of harmonicparallelismsto ensure coherence and comprehensibility. Example 8 depicts the more prominent of these-specifically, the C-major-Db-minor and E-major-F-minor progressions
in mm. 64-65 and 90-91 respectively, which clearly anticipate the
F-major-F#-minor motion in mm. 119-21 (the most shocking aspect
of which is not that it happens per se, but that it is the third such
progression within a single "movement"). Similarly abrupt Neapolitan relationships appear throughout, in some cases reiterating the
symmetricalstructuralmotion (as in the coda, mm. 559-61; see also
the scherzo, mm. 172 et seq.).
22

245

189

m.176

I

5
'\

"first
movement"

547 551

598

I

i0b

v
I
I
"slow
"scherzo" dominantmovement"
prolonging "finale" (with hypothetical
descent of fundamentalline)
extension

Example 6: Schubert, Fantasy, D. 760. Background-level tonal and
formal relationships.
m.121
A

5

A

A

A

8

5

426 430 438

6

8

164

A

A

A

V

i

5

5

4

3

2

1

^

,8

i
"scherzo" extension
"first
"slow
movement" movement"

i

repriseof "first movement",
followed by fugue; fundamental
line's descent is hypothetical

Example 7: Schubert, Fantasy, D. 940. Background-level tonal and
formal relationships.
A complementary nexus of motivic parallelisms operates in both
the F-minor Fantasy and the "Wanderer." The structuralneighbornote motion in D. 940-C-Db-C-appears
throughout the piece at
all hierarchicallevels (William Kinderman, for instance, emphasizes
"the crucial Db-C semitone" at the end of the Fantasy [1986, 79]),
just as Schubertmotivicallyexploits the structuralG-Ab -G motion in
D. 760, restating it in innumerablecontexts. Godel's term for the network of motivic relationships in D. 940-Erinnerungsstruktur (1979,
23

s?r64

f frfr r ri' A

0$
.

o

-

90

-

0

ti

,

,
I

r_bb

L

(6)

#3

b3

Example 8: Schubert, Fantasy, D. 940. "Parallel"harmonic progressions, mm. 64-65 and 90-91.

203)-indicates the unifying role played by "thematische Arbeit" in
this Fantasy: indeed, the "organic" unity that results from the many
harmonic and motivic cross-references lends the work a profoundly
"compositional"-as opposed to "improvisatory"-quality, at least
relative to Beethoven's Op. 77 and other early-nineteenth-century
This is equally true of the "Wanderer,"although in D. 760
fantasies.44
Schubert appears intentionally to undermine unity by favoring asymmetrical periodic structures(a factor at least as important as the harmonic treatment in creating the work's fantasy-like character), in
contrast to the altogether more balanced D. 940.
The "compositional" rather than "improvisatory"nature of these
two fantasies might even call into question their suitabilityfor a casestudy such as this: although both demonstrate an importantfeature of
early-nineteenth-century music-the assimilation of several forms
and genres into a single fantasy (this is also characteristicof Chopin's
Polonaise-Fantasy, Op. 61, studied below, as well as his "F-minor"
Fantasy, Op. 49)-they are perhaps too painstakinglyworked-out and
"organically"unified to be of relevance. Nevertheless, two factors justify their inclusion in this investigation (even if they are studied rather
more cursorilythan Beethoven's Op. 77 or Chopin's Op. 61): the ex24

istence of sketches for D. 940, and the impressive background-level
and formal similaritiesbetween the two works. These allow us to draw
conclusions about Schubert's "improvisatory long-range vision" in
writinghis music, a feature of the composer's style noted in somewhat
different terms by other authors such as Thom Lipiczky: "the astonishing speed at which Schubert 'composed' indicates a level of spontaneity akin to 'improvisations'regardless of the fact that he notated
his ideas. Schubert had thoroughly internalized the melodic, harmonic, and rhythmic formulas of his style" (1985, 157-58).
Such a view is fully supported by the sketches for the Fantasy in F
minor, which are lengthily described in Brown 1961 and 1966 and
Reed 1972. These consist of ten leaves dated January1828, which constitute an "outline sketch" up to m. 438 of the published version, that
is, the reprise of the opening melody, plus two remainingleaves from
a later date, which depict the final seventy or so measures. Sketches of
the interveningmaterial, made on an additional leaf (pp. 21-22 of the
twenty-six-sided manuscript), are lost. According to Reed (1972,
180-81), "The first two movements are all there, in outline"; furthermore, "apartfrom some filling out of the climax, [the last movement]
is identical with the final version." It is "with the scherzo [that] Schubert seems to have run into difficulty,particularlyover the middle section," where the "longish" march referred to earlier appears instead
of the con delicatezzamelody (the theme of which was added later on
blank staves beneath the march).
Brown's analysis of the sketches focuses exclusively on the thematic component: for instance, we read, "the indications are almost
entirely melodic, that is, the whole of the music springs, as it were,
from a melodic conception" (1966, 97). This statement is misleading,
as it neglects aspects of the tonal organizationor at least implicitlyrelegates them to a much inferior role. In fact, the essentially complete
nature of the sketches indicates that the key scheme of the final version was present at the inception of the work (assuming, that is, that
the sketches do represent the initial stages of composition, which
Schubert's normal compositional procedure would suggest): in other
words, the tonal plan depicted in ex. 7 seems to have guided Schubert
from the start. The rejected march, like the con delicatezza section
that would ultimately replace it, is in D major, thus articulatingthe
same tonal motion, i-VI-i in Ft minor, as the scherzo in its published
version. Interestingly, as Brown observes (1966, 98), "The only idea
in the sketched march that [Schubert]used was the sustained C sharp;
this, becoming enharmonicallya D flat, still serves as the link between
the scherzo, in F sharp minor, and the closing section in F minor."45
Thus, even important motivic/harmonic parallelisms echoing the
structuralprogression in the final version appear at incipient stages.
25

If, as Brown surmises(1966, 99), the music, "still hazy in details, [was]
there in [the composer's] mind" from early on, then perhaps it was
Schubert'sconscious or unconscious use of a "basic"plan like the one
in ex. 7 that allowed him confidently to write out the work in such a
finished state.
The striking structuralresemblances between this Fantasy and the
"Wanderer" equally suggest that such a "basic plan" directed the
compositional process. To the extent that D. 760's structure was innovatory for Schubert(one must take into account his "extreme fondness for shifts into keys a semitone above or below his tonic key"
[Brown 1951, 542]), it is entirely possible that in writing the Fantasy
in F minor, the composer deliberately returned to a successful "improvisatory" background-level model-that of the "Wanderer"which would be similarlyrealized in the middlegroundand foreground
to create a network of harmonic/motivicparallelisms. That the fundamental line is treated in such a straightforwardmanner in both
works further supports the hypothesis that a "basic plan" guided
Schubert: as in Beethoven's Op. 77, instability deriving from bold
structuralprogressionsis offset by a conventional tonal close. To paraphrase Schenker (1979, 18), the "secret of balance" in this music
likely originated in the composer's "constant awareness" of the underlying structure:without it, the foregroundcould well have "degenerated into chaos."

C. Chopin: Polonaise-Fantasy, Op. 61
Chopin composed two mature fantasies: the "F-minor," Op. 49
and the Polonaise-Fantasy,Op. 61. The former, analyzed in detail by
Carl Schachter (1988), was one of the last large-scale works Chopin
wrote before undertakinga fundamentalstylistic reassessment, which
began around 1841 with a study of counterpointtreatises by Cherubini
and Kastner and experimentation with contrapuntalprocedures such
as canon and fugue (as in the Fugue in A minor, KK 1242). The legacy
of this period of reevaluation is manifest not only in the highly contrapuntaltextures of certain late works-among them the Nocturne in
E major, Op. 62, No. 2 and the Mazurka in COminor, Op. 63, No.
3-but also, as Jeffrey Kallberg observes, in a more restraineduse of
ornamentation, the use of nonpitched elements to define form, and
the exploitation of rhythm "to increase tension over entire sections of
pieces." In this "last style,"
transcended highsophistication earlierworks,eitherby
the
of
harmony
reaches,or by repeating,as a unifyingdevice,
probingmore chromatic
26

the same chordalprogressionsthroughouta work. New genres were
essayed, and old ones rechargedby the admixtureof elements from
other forms. (1985, 226)
The work discussed in this section-the Polonaise-Fantasy(which
was composed in 1845-46 along with the Barcarolle, Op. 60 and the
Nocturnes Op. 62)-offers a particularlyapt example of Chopin's innovative approach to genre: like the Polonaise in F$ minor, Op. 44,
the Polonaise-Fantasy fuses at least two genres used earlier by the
composer. By analyzing the work, comparing it with the Barcarolle,
and taking into account the sketches for Op. 61 (which offer relevant
insights into Chopin's compositional method), it is possible to show
both the close link between improvisation and composition in
Chopin's music, and the applicabilityof Schenker's notion of improvisation to Op. 61 despite the apparent challenges posed by the
sketches.
Opus 61 presents the analyst with a host of difficultissues. To what
end does the introductionreturn late in the work, followed by a fragment from the central section and then, after a turbulenttransition, an
apotheosis of the principal themes? How should one interpret the
"parallel"progressiontoward the middle of the piece, from Ab minor
(m. 108) through Bb major (m. 116, first stated in second inversion) to

B minor/major(mm. 132/148)?Why should Chopin so avidly withhold
closure throughout the work, arrivingat a full cadence in only a few
places? And what structuralprinciples prevail in a piece noteworthy
(in Jim Samson's words) for its "apparent profligacy"?46
Numerous writers have grappled with the Polonaise-Fantasyin an
effort to answer questions such as these, among them Liszt (who, as
Paul Hamburger writes [1966, 105 n. 12], "had oddly prim reservations even about the content of the music" [see Liszt 1852, 45]), Hugo
Leichtentritt(1921, 1:110-21), Lew Mazel (1965), Zofia Lissa (1963),
and Eero Tarasti (1984). Most have explained the work as an amalgam of forms and genres-sonata form, theme and variations, ballade, concerto, and (not surprisingly)polonaise and fantasy. But, as
Kallberg points out, "while all of these writers responded to a significant aspect of Chopin's late style-generic borrowing-most advanced inordinately complex models that little touch the auditory
experience of the work." Kallberg proposes instead that the piece
should be thought of rathermore simply "as an alloy of the two genres
in its title" (1985, 274 n. 21), a view he supports by examining the
broad traditions-in particular the formal archetypes-behind each
genre, and by studying Chopin's sketches for Op. 61.
Other authors-for instance, Felix Salzer, Nicholas Cook, and Jim
Samson-have approachedthe work using Schenkerianmethods, with
27

Measures Theme/Section
1-23
24-66
66-107
108-15
116-47
148-81
182-205
206-13
214-15
216-25
226-41
242-53
254-68
268-88

Introduction
PolonaiseTheme (with
development)
DevelopmentalEpisode
of
FirstTransformation
PolonaiseTheme
FirstNocturne, then
Transition
Slow Section
Second Nocturne
Slow Section resumed
Introduction
returns
Second Nocturnereturns
Transition
Apotheosis of Polonaise
Theme
Apotheosis of Slow Section
Coda

Tonal Region
i (Al minor) -- V
I
I-IIIl -blVI- vii-i V (---) V

i -*ii
IIt -"b,iiibb" (i.e.,

B minor)
"bIII"(i.e., B major)
vi/"b -- "bIII"
III"
(various)

vi -- I

(various)
V46

I6-5
I

I

Figure 2: Chopin, Polonaise-Fantasy, Op. 61. Principal themes and
tonal regions (cf. Samson 1988, 52).

varying degrees of success. Salzer (1962, ex. 409) focuses on only the
first nineteen bars of the piece, whereas Cook's analysis of the entire
work consists of "two quite independent fundamental structuresembedded one within the other, each in a different key" (1987, 340).47
Although provocative, this interpretationessentially denies the underlying structuralunity of the piece, which has in fact been clearly demonstrated by Samson (1988), whose middle- and background graphs
(presented in a study of Chopin's "composition-draft")are altogether
more cogent, although it remains unclear how the pitches in Samson's
structuraloctave descent are prolonged in the music.
Despite the extensive treatment given to the work in the literature,
the Polonaise-Fantasy warrants further analytical examination, not
only to describe its structurein greater detail, but also to investigate
the relation between Schenker's principles of improvisation and this
extraordinary"improvisatory"work.48Figure 2 summarizes Op. 61
accordingto its principaltonal regions and themes (most defined as in
Samson 1988, 52; cf. Abraham 1939, 110), and ex. 9 presents the
work's backgroundstructure. As in the Barcarolle, Op. 60 (of which
28

m.1-56

66 116-24 148

206 221 242

5

5

5

(5
A

I .

4

2

(II: 3

1)

I 1

2

4

3

2

1

1

1

3
I

268

266 267

V

I

Example 9. Chopin, Polonaise-Fantasy, Op. 61. Background structure.
m.1

6
A

5

Bg

40??,?#

39
AA

5

,47I'.

76
5

84

101

A

A

5

4

102

103

A

A

A

3

2

1

JIijJ

--.

qv

1tiI
I
Theme/Section: introduction A

V

I
B1,B2 "improvi- A',B2
sation"

V

I
coda
(B1")

Example 10. Chopin, Barcarolle, Op. 60. Background structure.

ex. 10 presents the background),49this is based on a "dynamic"underlying progression I-bIII-V-I (whereas earlier polonaises tend to
have closed, symmetrical structures-for instance, i-I-i or I-vi-Ilacking in "structuralmomentum"),50which prolongs the head note
S throughoutthe piece (compare Op. 60). Subsidiarydescents in I and
III51appear in the treble, and in the bass Chopin connects the main
harmonies with a rising linear motion, assigning important formal
functions to each of the passing tones, the first of them (Bb) supporting the "firstnocturne," and the second (db), the transitionleading to
the apotheoses of the polonaise theme and slow section. The major/
minor opposition between the bass ascent (in Ab minor) and the
29

fundamentalline (in Al major) extends to all structurallevels in the
piece (see Samson 1988, 49-50).
The middlegroundgraph in ex. 11 reveals an important structural
motive-a five-note linear ascent from abl to the head note, el2which is related to the fundamentalline and which occurs three times
in the work, in each case directly preceding a structuraldescent. The
first of these, in mm. 1-56, establishes the primary melodic tone 3
after climbing through the chromaticallyaltered 4 in m. 51. Although
it traversesthe same pitches as the first ascent, the second ascent uses
its raised 4 in conjunction with the bass passing tone in m. 116 (124)
to create the Bl-major harmony on which the "first nocturne" is
based. Toward the end of the piece, the third and final ascent links the
apotheosis of the polonaise theme with that of the slow section, diatonically reaching 5 twelve measures before the fundamental line descends.
Other noteworthy features at the middleground level include the
use of parallel harmonicprogressions (for instance, between the "first
nocturne" and the slow section [mm. 116-48], and between the slow
section and the apotheosis [mm. 206-21]-compare Schubert's Fantasy in F minor), which enhance the work's "improvisatory"character; neighbor-note motions (N.B. the f2 in m. 221, which forms IV
along with the bass passing tone dl); the octave descent in the introduction, which embellishes the first pitch in the initial ascent to 5; and
the appearance of the tonic in other harmonic contexts (for instance,
as vi/ III in m. 182). It is significantthat Chopin avoids closure at the
end of the slow section: althoughthe subsidiarydescent in bIII reaches
its goal-"clb2"-in m. 206, the "eb2" above it keeps the section open
and facilitates the ensuing parallelprogressionthrough C major to IV.
Earlier in the piece, closure is withheld when the introduction overlaps with the polonaise theme, the first four bars of the latter (mm.
24-27) completing the introductoryoctave-progression.
Avoidance of closure to heighten "structuralmomentum"-one of
many "rational deceptions"-works alongside the seemingly random
arrangement of themes and thematic reminiscences and the parallel
structural progressions to provide Op. 61 with its "improvisatory"
character. Coherence is enhanced, however, by the many motivic
parallelisms found at all structurallevels (among them the five-note
ascents to 5 and the fourth-progressionsin the bass [mm. 242-53]
and "alto" [mm. 254-64]), and as in the Barcarolle and other largescale works by Chopin, structural weight is channelled toward the
end of the piece, where the principal themes are transformed in a
powerful apotheosis highlighting the fundamental line's descent.
All in all, therefore, the Polonaise-Fantasy testifies to Chopin's
"improvisatorylong-range vision" at this late stage in his composi30

m.l

22 27

31

48

51

56

61

62

66

8

)

2

5
en

t
2A
2

t

A
4o

3

5

A

A

3

4

A

4

A

A

2

)

Mg,

Mgl (

V

Example 11. Chopin, Polonaise-Fantasy, Op. 61. Midd

tional career: even an apparently disordered work such as this relies
on principles of tonal design consistent with those later articulated
by Schenker.
*

*

*

It must be stressed that the analyticalconclusions reached here pertain to the Polonaise-Fantasyas published, not as first conceived. The
sketches of the work reveal that Chopin's originalconception radically
differed from the final version: he began the piece not in Ab minor but
in C minor, then changing to F minor (he decided on Ab minor only
later), and he drafted the "first nocturne" and slow section-about a
third of the piece-a semitone higher than in the printed version.
These profound differences in the work's tonal scheme raise serious
doubts about the validity of Schenker's notion of improvisation:
whereas Schenker maintained that the great masters "instantaneously
sketched out" a basic plan-that is, something akin to a background
or middlegroundstructure--to guide them in improvisingand in composing, Chopin was clearly quite content, in Samson's words (1988,
51), to "shift a pre-composed paragraphfrom one tonal platform to
another" without undue concern for the overall harmonic design of
the work.
Despite this evidence, however, it would be wrong to dismiss
Schenker's principles as irrelevant to the Polonaise-Fantasywithout
having first gained a broader understandingof what the sketches reveal about Chopin's compositional process. First of all, the sketched
material52was not drafted linearly (that is, in the order of the final
version): Chopin notated the work in large, continuous sections"continuity-drafts"-and in numerous shorter segments scattered
throughout. The introduction, initial statement of the polonaise
theme, developmental episode up to m. 92, slow section, apotheosis,
and coda were written out without apparent difficulty, whereas
Chopin agonized over what would eventually become mm. 92-117
and 193-205, working and reworking these passages to join the continuously drafted passages more smoothly.
It might be that Chopin's confidence in the larger sections resulted
from his clear understandingof their formal function in the generic
hybrid of polonaise and fantasy (as Kallberg concludes),5 but his assurance in these passages could also indicate conscious or unconscious54reference to a comprehensive tonal plan-or, rather, one of
several tonal plans-which, although different from that of the final
version, would have acted like background or middleground structures at each successive stage of the work's evolution. These "basic
32

plans"-which would have varied accordingto the harmony at the beginning, but which would all have had the polonaise theme in Ab
major and the slow section in C major (both Kallberg [1985] and Samson [1988] indicate the constancy of these two features in the
sketches)-would have been based on the principal harmonies corresponding to the tonal regions of the music that Chopin sketched without difficulty. It was the passages betweenthe structural"pillars"that
caused problems-passages whose tonal function had not been clearly
conceptualized in advance. Schenker's principles of improvisation
therefore might not be wholly inapplicable to the Polonaise-Fantasy:
reference to a number of tonal outlines in sketching the piece could
have enabled Chopin to write out the continuity-draftsin the "sweep
of improvisation"that Schenkerwould later claim to be implicit in the
composition of masterpieces.
Although highly conjectural, this interpretationof the sketches and
of Chopin's compositional process in general can be justified at least
in part if the successive tonal structures that might have served the
composer as "basic plans" are extrapolated from the draft and compared to the rest of his music. The background graphs presented in
exx. 12-14 reflect Chopin's use of the three different harmonies at the
start of the introduction while retaining the Ab-major polonaise
theme and the C-major slow section as constants. Example 12a treats
C minor as the tonic (in keeping with the key signature of three flats
that appears at the beginning of the sketch). Although this results in
a convincing tonal plan similar to that of numerous works by Chopin,
doubts about the major or minor quality of the recapitulatedmaterial
make this hypotheticalmodel less plausible than that in ex. 12b, where
C minor/majorinitiates a progression from iii and III through V to I
(rather like the III-V-i structure in Brahms's Op. 118, No. 1: see
Schenker 1979, fig. 110d3),with a "neighbor-note"motion in the fundamental line. That Ab major is first heard as VI/iii-not as the
tonic-in the initial statement of the polonaise theme creates an effective "rational deception," making this structureseem all the more
credible as Chopin's first "basic plan."
Example 13 contains two graphsstartingwith the F-minorharmony
that Chopin turned to next (markingFmol [sic] above the firstsystem,
implying a key signature of four flats, and drafting an alternative
opening in this key later in the sketches). TreatingF minor as the tonic
while retainingAb major for the polonaise theme and C major for the
slow section results in the hypothetical structurein ex. 13a, which, unlike that in ex. 12b, is based on an underlying progression similar to
countless others used by Chopin-i-III-V-with
considerable momentum generated in the drive to the dominant. Once again, however, it is the recapitulation that casts doubt on this structural
33

9

3
(VI: 5

-- -

A,

9

3A
4

- ,

3

2

1)

(:3

2

1)

1 SI

? ?

Bg
i
i
?v
introduction

v

I

"apotheosis" of polonaise
theme and slow section?

slow
section

polonaise
theme

Example 12a: Chopin, Polonaise-Fantasy,Op. 61. Hypothetical background structure. Opening in C minor; tonic = C
minor/major.

Bg

iii
introduction

III
polonaise
theme

slow
section

V

]

"apotheosis" of polonaise
theme and slow section

Example 12b: Chopin, Polonaise-Fantasy,Op. 61. Hypothetical background structure. Opening in C minor; tonic = Ab
major.
scenario, thus suggesting ex. 13b as the outline Chopin probably
envisaged when starting the work in F minor. Here, the introduction
acts as a large-scale "harmonic appoggiatura"based on vi, resolving
to I (Ab major) with the start of the polonaise theme. The progression
that follows- I-III l-V-I-is typical of Chopin's music; the chromatic
embellishmentof the head note-5-- S-bS-is less characteristic.This
34

i

A

A

4

(III:5

A I,L--.---

A

A

A
3

A
4

A
1

A
2

A

)

--

t1l
%iWblb
Bg

A
5

5

5

5

A

A

I (v:3 2

1)

ItF)e

6

J
-_

b
I-

B g

~
:0

(C):b

b

d
,
I,

-

_1 _
,,~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

-

I

III

I

V

I - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - ..

I

V

-I

()

_( ))
introduction

"apotheosis"of polonaise

slow
section

polonaise
theme

theme and slow section?

Example 13a: Chopin, Polonaise-Fantasy,Op. 61. Hypothetical background structure. Opening in F minor; tonic = F
minor/major.
A

5

A

(5

A
15

l5
A

4

A

A

3

A
4

A
3

A
2

A
1

A

2

1)

A

A

A

0
f^^^4 .-b;^

S_ f

-F h I
?

I

o-,~~

"
Bg
(

tP~bd
Ir

i

vi

introduction

-

polonaise
theme

- f-

..

r

---I

5I1q

slow
section

i
v

Li
1

"apotheosis" of polonaise
theme and slow section

Example 13b: Chopin, Polonaise-Fantasy,Op. 61. Hypothetical background structure. Opening in F minor; tonic = Ab
major.

structure, which is an entirely plausible "basic plan," has much in
common with the underlyingvi-V-I progression of the Fantasy, Op.
49, particularlyat the middleground level (see Schachter 1988).
The hypothetical structuresshown in exx. 14a and 14b are the last
Chopin might have considered before altering the slow section's tonal
setting to B major ("blII"), a decision implemented at a very late
35

I

iii -----.-----III
slow
first transformation of polonaise section
theme? develomental transition?

intro- polonaise
duction theme

I
V
"apotheosisof
polonaise theme
and slow section

(See ex. 15a for middlegroundgraphof mm. 66-152.)

5

5

5 3"

4

2^

A

(III: 3

1
.)

_=~

8
5

Bg

5

45

_I

8
5

intro- polonaise + first
duction theme
transformation

,
V

III

I

i3

2 1)

-_

W b L^
^bb

4

III4
slow
"first
nocturne" section

I

v

I

"apotheosisof
polonaise theme
and slow section

(See ex. 15b for middlegroundgraph of mm. 66-148.)

Example 14: Chopin, Polonaise-Fantasy, Op. 61. Hypothetical background structures. Opening in Ab minor; tonic = Ab
major.
stage of sketching. Here, as in the final version, the work begins with
Ab minor/majoras the tonic, moves through III in the slow section
and V in the apotheosis, and reaches I after the descent of the fundamental line. Different transitionsfrom I to III~ distinguishthe two
graphs, reflecting the difficulty Chopin experienced in effecting this
connection. Initially he appears to have forseen C minor as the har36

Measure:
(as in final
version)

92

66( )86

98

105

]

[

_-

2n

d

a

(1

s

c

148 151 152

5
e

n

t

to

2

5

5
3

4

5

(i3i:s

4

.1

I
.l
_1W_-!~~

Mg2

~ bb t

1.
L IP

~

l

-J

etc.

^-^~?

bb r
r_r
-

I

.

t--_
V

2 i)

V/ii

'

-

<

V/iii

iii

IIIi

first
slow
transformation section
of polonaise
theme?

developmental
transition?

Example 15a: Chopin, Polonaise-Fantasy, Op. 61. Reconstruction
from sketches: mm. 105-48 (cf. ex. 14a).

monic goal of the developmental episode, most likely planning to
transpose the polonaise theme to iii for its "first transformation,"or
possibly intending simply to continue the development of the theme's
principal motives until the slow section began (nowhere in the
sketches do we find the "first transformation"notated in C minor).
Irrespective of the passage's thematic goal, transcriptions (for instance, Kallberg 1985, 288-90, exx. 4 and 5) show that Chopin made
at least four attempts to steer the music toward iii, and ex. 14a represents the background structurethat he might have envisaged when
using C minor to connect I and III~. Example 15a's middleground
graph reveals that the drafts of this passage are based on a structure
almost identical to that of the final version-namely, a linear ascent
from i to 3 via the raised fourth d2--although the harmonizationis
different, continuing the progression started in mm. 92-105. That the
structuralbasis of this passage was retained in the final.version,55even
though C minor was ultimately abandoned, supports the view that
Chopin relied at least intuitively on some sort of outline or plan in
sketching the work.
Dissatisfaction
with C minoras temporarygoal led to the revision
shown in ex. 14b, in which Ab minor/major
prevailsuntil the "first
37

Measure:
(as in fmal
version)-

66( )86

92

98

105

108

112 [

]

116
A

5
A

2 n d

a

s

c

^^~~~~~~

e

n

t

t

o

5

A

A

A

octave prg.

A^-^^^**"^^^-^^-N

irs-

Mg2

-first transformationof
polonaise theme

7 7 7

link?

"first n

Example 15b: Chopin, Polonaise-Fantasy, Op. 61. Reconstruction from

nocturne" begins in "bIII" (that is, B major). At this stage, Chopin
evidently planned to retain the tonic for the polonaise theme's "first
transformation," but in drafting the passage he ran into difficulty,
abandoning the texturally enriched repetition (which starts like mm.
108-14 of the final version but then continues as in the first statement
of the theme, whereas in the published version Chopin interruptsthe
repeat with the sudden one-measure link to the "firstnocturne") upon
reaching the counterpartto m. 34. Here, about to cadence on iii, he
arrived at the end of the page and stopped sketching (see Kallberg
1985, 290-92 for a transcriptionof the relevant passage). It is obvious
that at this point Chopin had not fully devised the means of connecting
Ab minor/major and B major at the foreground level: only after rethinking the entire backgroundstructureand lowering the key of the
slow section could he return to this passage and harmonicallyrealign
it as in the final version. The middleground graph shown in ex. 15b
representsthe passage at this stage of the work's evolution, suggesting
some of the structuralproblems implicit in Chopin's more or less literal repetition of the polonaise theme: namely, how to link i and III,
and how to harmonize the five-note structuralascent that might have
been carried over from the earlier version of the section.
One last question remains about the hypothetical models in exx.
14a and 14b: how did Chopin intend to connect the C-majorslow section to the apotheosis at the middle- and foregroundlevels? Although
firm conclusions remain elusive (mm. 214-20 are omitted from the
sketch), Chopin might have planned to returnto both the introduction
and the "second nocturne" as in the final version, but this is improbable, as harmonicallythe two do not mesh when the repeated introduction startsin C major. (That the slow section ended firmlyin C was
clearly Chopin's intention: the sketches contain a much extended version of 206-13, with eight additional measures to reinforce III .)56A
more likely-if entirely conjectural-possibility is that from this
lengthy cadence in C major the music moved directly to the "second
nocturne," that is, to m. 216, as the graph in ex. 16 represents. The
connection is harmonicallyconvincing, although it lacks the full mystery of the final version.57
What Chopin had in mind at this point will never be known for
sure, but it is less difficult to imagine why he might have altered the
tonal setting of the "first nocturne" and slow section. Samson proposes various factors, among them the "associations of stillness and
serenity which the key of B major carried" for Chopin, the "more
congenial lie of the hand for the legato melody of the slow section"
when in B rather than C, and Chopin's recognition of the "potential
of his opening chords as a means of signalling the larger tonal movement of the piece" (1988, 54-57).58
39

206 208 209 [
S

Measure:
(as in final
version)
ri^o

216

218

220

221

222

stated twice
in sketches

[

L[:

]

3 ]

1

N

I_,----

I~l

2---

-1)

[^I

IV

IIIN

end of slow
section, final
version but up
semitone

cadentialextension
in sketches: descent
in treble : mm. 281-83
and 284-85

not in sketches:
hypothetical link,
from final version

in sketches:
, final version

Example 16: Chopin, Polonaise-Fantasy, Op. 61. Hypothetical link,
mm. 206-16ff., derived from sketches.

Another factor concerns the stylistic reassessment occurringwhen
Chopin composed Op. 61, which, as we have seen, resulted in a new
approach to ornamentation, rhythm, harmony, and genre. From the
analysis presented here, it is clear that this reappraisalextended even
to the level of ton structure the composer's late music. Although
al
in
the t
on 'al o het published piece has obvious advantagesover
ische
the three essayed inthe sketches, it would have been far con
more
sistent with Chopin's style as established in the 1820s and 1830s had
the version adhered to the -III-V-I progrea o shown in exx.
final
ssion
14a an 14b
d
had
used eennumerous earlier works and
in
, which
which was theona an entirelylogicaltonal foundation for Chopin to
trrefore
in
have
employed drafting the Polonaise-Fantasy. Various authors
have remarked that the use of C major (III) in the sketches is "surprising,"but is more striking that the familiar underlying progresit
sion was abandoned in favor of a new
t
IoadneIII-V-Ihas a
prowhich
structuralfunction nowhere else in Chopin's music except in the contemporaneous Barcarolle,
where the same harmonic succession appears in the background.
In composing these extended works at a time of profound stylistic
change, Chopin thus turned to a new tonal progressionwhich, despite
40

its superficialresemblance to other more characteristicstructures,was
nevertheless unique. The similarityof the "basic plans" used in these
two pieces, in addition to the many other structural characteristics
they share, highlights the close relation between improvisation and
composition in Chopin's music, and even more importantlythe use of
a common set of structuralprinciples-in other words, a stylisticuse of
structure59-in works belonging to very different genres. Although
their tonal schemes reveal that Chopin's approach to structure was
capable of change even at this late date, the Barcarolle and the
Polonaise-Fantasyessentially remain faithful to principles established
much earlier in the composer's career, when he developed the "improvisatory long-range vision" that would eventually guide him even
in writing complex compositions such as these.

41

NOTES
1. Throughoutthis article, publishedtranslationsare used when available;all
are
other translations mine. In the notes to Part I, quotationsfrom Schenker
and other authorsare providedin the originallanguageif no publishedtranslation exists.
for
2. Schenkeremploysseveralexpressionsto refer to improvisation: instance,
Improvisation, fantasieren, in extempore, and aus dem Stegreif, literally "out of

the stirrup"
according
("wie ein Reiter, der etwas erledigt,ohne abzusitzen,"
to the Kluge Etymologisches Worterbuch der Deutschen Sprache, 19th edn.

[Berlin, 1963],743).
3. Note the similarity these remarksto Schenker1912, xxxv:
of
erloschen?(Den hisIst nicht seitdem auch die Kunstdes Improvisierens
wohl der letzte
torischenBerichtenzufolgevermuteich, daBMendelssohn
gewesen, der diese Kunst noch besaB;ob auch Brahmssie besessen, ist
mindestensnicht bekanntgeworden!)Und wer weiB, ob nicht gerademit
der
jener Kunstdes Improvisierens selbst noch im Pathosanmutiggeblie.
bene Charakter Empfindung
der
zusammenhing . . ?
4. In excerptsfrom Schenker1954and 1984, "preludizing" been streamlined
has
to "preluding."
5. In Ein Beitragzur Ornamentik,
Schenkerclaimsthat tonal referencessuch as
these enhanceunity by meansof "groupformation[Gruppenbildung]"
(1976,
28). CompareSchenker1954, ??129ff.
6. See Rink 1988a and 1989 for furtherdiscussionof the ChromaticFantasy's
structure,especiallythat of mm. 49-70.
7. These "principles" discussedin Rink 1988a.Furthermentionof composiare
tional "plans"can be foundpassimin Schenker1912, 1913, 1914, and 1915.
8.
Nun wirdmanmich,hoffe ich, verstehen,wennich sage, daBwie einerseits
nurdas Gefiihlder Urlinieden Meister die Fahigkeit Improvisation
zur
als
dem Urgrundauch ihrerAuskomponierungs- Synthese-Kunst, wie
und
so
im engerendannauchdie Folgerichtigkeit der Verwandlung Prolonin
der
gationeneintrug,es anderseitsden nicht wahrhaftBerufenenan Improvifehlen muB,weil
sation, Auskomponierung,
Synthese,Prolongationskunst
ihnendas sichereGefuhlfur die Urlinieversagtist, aus der alleinalle diese
und Kiinsteerwachsen.(1923b,46)
Fiihigkeiten
9. "Uberwaltigend der Eindruck 32tel-Laufes T. 9-10, der den Zug der
ist
des
in
Urlinie(6) s-i, (c3)bl-Es, im SturmdurchmiBt. Bei solcherKuhnheit
...
der
welche Kraftdes Organischen!"
Improvisation
(1922b,4-5).
10. "Wasfur Improvisationskunst jungenMeisters!"(1922a,35).
des
11.
AuchstelltsicheinemiberschnellenVortrag,wie er heuteim Schwange
ist,
schon das Improvisatorische Bach von vornhereininnerlichin Widerbei
spruch-und stand nicht bei ihm fast alles auf dem Stehgreif-Schaffen?
Offenbarist die Unfahigkeitzu improvisieren
heute zum Hindernis
geworeines Bach auchnurnachzuhoren
den, die nie dagaweseneStehgreif-Kunst
-wie denn stets der eine Mangelden andernnach sich zu ziehen pflegt.
(1923a,26)
12.
Die Geistesgegenwart, der unsere Genies den Tonstoffin solcherArt
mit
meisterten,hat ihnen ja erst moglichgemacht,weit ausholendeSynthesen
42

zu schaffen.Ihre Werkesind eben nichtzusammengeklaubt,
sondernnach
Art der freien Fantasiesofort umrissenund aus einem geheimenUrgrund
(1925, 40)
herausgeftihrt.
This translation partlybased on Ian Bent's (1986, 131).
is
13. This fantasydemonstrates
that "freie"and "gebundene"
in
improvisation the
maintain.(Forinstance,
eighteenthcenturywerenot as distinctas some authors
see Vanhulst1971, 142-53.)
14. "Ich will nur einen bescheidenenBeitragzur Kunstder Diminutionbringen,
die das Hauptmittel der freien Fantasie ist . . . " (1925, 12). See the extended

in
discussionof diminution ??251ff.of Der freie Satz, where Schenkerwrites:
"It is clear that the thoroughstudy of such art of embellishment
must necessarilygive insightinto the art of improvisation"
(1979, 97).
15. "Die Schonheitder Ausfiihrung
liegt also in dem Festhaltensozusageneines
kleinerenBrechungsmotivs
innerhalbder grolen Brechungund im Verhiillen
dieses Zusammenhangs
durch ein Laufwerk,das bei bestimmterErfiillung
eines Zieles gleichwohlein ziellos Irrendesvortauscht"
(1925, 28).
16. This essay is filled with numerousadditionalreferencesto improvisation,
of
whichthe followingis perhapsthe most significant:
"We see that the diminutionscouldnot possiblyblossominto suchunity-the unityand synthesisof the
whole whichflowsfromthe fundamental and the bass arpeggiation-were
line
it not for the miracleof improvisation!"
(1977,48). See also Schenker1977,45,
48, and 50-53.
17. Schenkeralso writes:"Without
improvisational that is, withoutthe ability
gift,
to connect the compositionto the middleground
and background,no good
to
occur
fuguecan everbe written"(1979, 144).Otherreferences improvisation
on pp. 9 and 142.
18. Discussingimprovisation the handsof the Romanticvirtuoso,Wangermee
in
writes:"on lui a souventfait le reproched'etrel'apotheosedu mauvaisgoft"
(1950, 244).
19. Accountsof Hummel'sextemporaneous
indicatethe eclecticnaperformances
ture of some early-nineteenth-centuryimprovisatory
music: see The Athenaeum(15 May1830):301;also, LouisSpohr,Selbstbiographie,vols. (Cassel,
2
Fetis'sdescription an improvisation IgnazMoscheof
1860),1:206.Compare
by
les, quoted in Wangerm6e1970, 17-18. For furtherinformationon earlysee
1950and 1970;Schleuning
nineteenth-century
improvisation, Wangermee
1971and 1973;Suttoni1973;Poniatowska1980;and Carew1981.
20. Note for instancethe followingpassages:
It is one of the beautiesof improvisation feign modulation a new key
to
to
througha formalcadenceand then move off in anotherdirection.This and
otherrationaldeceptions[verniinftige
makea fantasiaattracBetriigereyen]
tive; but they mustnot be excessivelyused, or naturalrelationships bewill
come hopelesslyburiedbeneaththem. (1949, 434)
Thosewho are capablewill do well whenthey departfroma too natural
use
of harmony introduce occasionaldeception[sondern Ohrzuweilen
to
an
das
betriget]....
(1949, 439)
So-called deceptive progressions [Die sogenannten Betriigereyen] are also

broughtout markedlyto complementtheir function.(1949, 163)

43

21. Oswald Jonas writes of K. 475:
The [descending] path to the dominant is so strongly rooted in our consciousness that when the bass begins a descent from the fundamental, the
maximum opportunity to generate tension by means of expansion is open to
the composer. The release of such tension can even become the content of
an entire piece. ... In this way the plan for an entire composition-the plan
of this Fantasy-grows out of the sense of tonal space, the obligation set up
by the composing-out of a fourth-progression [from c to G]. (1982, 73; emphasis added)
Compare Edward Laufer's comments (1988, 99-100, 113):
for the classical composers, the term fantasy often denotes a work of improvisatory character, as if without clear direction, in which the composer
seemingly loses his way, goes astray, and returns to the crossroads ... to try
again. This procedure may be expressed through a kind of motto, or middleground motive, which, restated and transformed, is the carrier of the
musical denouement.
. . . the opening section [of Mozart's Fantasy in C major, K. 394] becomes
a model which the rest of the piece strives to emulate. In a broad sense, this
opening Adagio having expressed a I-V motion, the Fantasy as a whole not
only tries to restate the same progression, but. . . gives the illusion of going
astray many times before finally attaining this goal.
For further discussion of K. 475, see Salzer 1962, 1:251-53; Schleuning 1971,
2:13-14; Rosen 1972, 91-93; and Schleuning 1973, 332-49. The measure numberings adopted here are those of the Neue Mozart Ausgabe.
See Salzer 1976 for discussion of the role of verniinftige Betriigerey
in eighteenth-century music, and especially in Haydn's Fantasia from Op. 76,
No. 6.
22. "DaB Bach auch in der Diminution einer freien Fantasie auf einer genauesten
Ordnung besteht und sie nur eben der Fantasie halber hinter dem Schein von
Unordnung verbirgt, macht das Unnachahmliche seiner Kunst aus" (1925, 28).
Note also Schenker's remarks in the Chromatic Fantasy edition: "This skillful and extremely important artistic technique [Kunstgriff] of creating harmonic
connections even across interpolated passages is one of the hidden features of
[J. S.] Bach's consummate writing" (1984, 35). Although translated here as "artistic technique," Kunstgriff could be interpreted more literally, in the sense of
"trick" or "artifice." Perhaps even the title of Schenker's essay "Die Kunst der
Improvisation" should be understood not only in the sense of the art of improvisation (as it is normally translated), but also the artifice thereof.
23. William Mitchell observes that the Fantasy at the end of the Versuch-on which
Schenker bases much of his Meisterwerk study-only hints at the true nature of
Bach's improvisatory technique; nevertheless, "for all its circumscribed, unassuming modesty, [the work] breathes the same atmosphere as the famous final
piece of the Probestucke, also a free fantasia" (Bach 1949, 22).
Reliance on principles of good tonal "grammar" seems to have characterized Bach's improvisations: see Vrieslander 1925, 268ff.; Schleuning 1973, 146283; and Ottenberg 1987, 78-85 and 167-71.

44

24.

Die Kentnisder Noten, Pausen,Zeichen, Manieren,Taktarten ist die
etc.
Der GeneralbaB die Lehre von der Verwandschaft
und
der
Orthographie.
Tone ist die Etymologie.Nun fehlt ja noch die Prosodieund der Syntax.
Denn obgleichim Generalbasse
etwaswenigesvom Syntaxangebracht
ist,
so hilft dis doch nur in einzelen Fallen. Der musikalische
Syntaxfordert
und
mehr,er verlangtErfindung Zusammensetzung
zugleich,er ist Syntax,
Rhetorikund Oratorie.([1782],265)
25. "Wirwollen durchein Schemader gewohnlichsten
Ueberginge und AusweichungendergleichenAnfangernzu Hiilfe kommen"([1767], 148).
26. See Vanhulst1971, 111-14 and Jenkins1976, vol. 2 for detailedlists of other
late-eighteenth-centurykeyboardtutors.
27. Perhapsit is partlyfor this reason that Bach disparaged
most contemporary
treatises.See his letter dated January11, 1773to the Hamburger
unpartheiischer Correspondent,
translatedin Bach 1949,4 (see also pp. 8-9).
Vanhulst (1971, 142-53) comparesBach's Versuchwith the treatises of
other eighteenth-century
writers,whichhe findsuniversally
wanting:intended
for amateurs beginners,they treatimprovisation a functional
and
as
ratherthan
artisticactivity,concentrating "gebundene"
on
in
improvisation a "strict"
style
on the organ.
28. The partimento
tradition,establishedin southernItaly by the mid-eighteenth
entire keycentury,was one such practiceprovidingmodels for improvising
board works. The RiemannLexikon defines the partimento-literally,"division"-as
die Skizzeeines polyphonenSatzesin einer fortlaufenden
Stimme,die bei
teils aus beziffertenGeneralbass-Partien,
teils
haufigenSchliisselwechsel
aus thematischen
bestehtund als Vorlagefir eine weitgehend
Linienziigen
des
Satzesauf dem Tasteninstruimprovisatorische
Ausfuhrung skizzierten
ment diente. ([Riemann]1967, 707)
as
Althoughthe partimento
graduallylost its significance a model for improvisers, becomingsimply a tool for compositionteaching, the traditionpenetratednorthern
Europebeforeits demisein the earlynineteenthcentury.Two
worksformerly
attributed J. S. Bach-BWV 907 and908-are
to
contemporary
akin to partimenti(see [Riemann]1967, 707), as is the plan at the end of
C. P. E. Bach'sVersuch some of Handel'sexercises(see Christensen
and
1992).
RudolfQuoika(1958)describesa similartraditionfosteredin Pragueby Jozef
in
Seger(1716-82), citingCarlFranzPitsch's1834edition(published Pragueby
MarcoBerra) of the thoroughbass
models used by Seger in improvisation:
J.

Segers bezifferte Bdsse in zwei Notensystemen vierstimmig und mit Beziehung
auf harmonische Zergliederung durch Angabe des Hauptklanges. Detailed ac-

countsof thepartimento's
historycanbe foundin Fellerer1931,1932,1939,and
1940;see also Christensen1992, Ferand 1961, 19, and Lester 1992, passim.
Fellerer1940and de Nardis1933reproducenumerous
partimenti.
29. Note that this polaritybetweeneighteenth-and nineteenth-century
improvisafromC. P. E. Bach'sfreie
torypracticesonly hints at the complex"evolution"
Fantasieto the virtuosotraditionof Hummeland others.
See Jenkins1976,vol. 2 for a handlist early-nineteenth-century
of
treatises.
45

30. Nevertheless,Wangerm6e
(1950, 242) claimsthat by 1830,when Czernypubtradition
lishedhis treatise,virtually
described
nothingwas left of the preluding
by
by C. P. E. Bach and perpetuated composerslike Mozart.
For furtherdiscussionof Czerny'streatise, see Wangermee1950, 234ff.;
Schleuning1973, 350-51; Poniatowska1980, llff.; and Carew 1981, 1:210.
CompareCzerny[1848], 1:82-89.
31. Otherfactorscontributing the demiseof improvisation
to
includedthe replacement of the salon (whereimprovisatory
practicesthrived)by largerand more
formalconcertsin whichextemporaneous
was
music-making deemedinapprobetweencompositionand improvisation,
repriate,andgreaterdifferentiation
sultingfrom the general trend towardspecialization
duringthis period. (See
Ferand1938, 18.) Additionalfactorsare discussedin Schleuning
1973, 350-68
and Dahlhaus1979, 20-21. In particular,
Dahlhausblamesthe decline of improvisationon the replacementof Gerusttechnik
(which all but guaranteeda
for
basedprocedures
which,
music)by thematically
logicalstructure improvised
as Czerny'streatise demonstrates,grew more widespreadin the early nineteenth century:
ist
Entscheidend offenbarnicht, daBdie Talenteund das Interesseabstarben und die institutionellen
Fundamentezerbrockelten,sonderndaB die
Grundformkompositorischen
Denkens seit Haydn und Beethoven, die
Idee des Thematischen, Improvisation einem verquerenVerhaltnis
zur
in
stand. (1979, 21)
See JeffreyKallberg,"Small'forms':in defence of the prelude,"in The
Cambridge Companion to Chopin, ed. Jim Samson (Cambridge, 1992), pp.

124-31 for discussion how the conceptof musicalformevolvedin the 1830s
of
and 1840s.
32. "Apres C. P. E. Bach, les oeuvres entierementimprovis6es
essaient d'imiter
autantque possible les formes les plus s6veres de la compositionmusicale"
(1971, 152).
33. Czernyprovidesa more colorfulaccountof Op. 77's origins:
A foreignpianistonce, in a mixedcompany,ended with begginghis auditors to give him a theme to extemporize
upon. Beethoven,who was always
in
merryand mischievous company,went to the piano and ranup the scale
throughthe several octaves, and sat down again, laughing.The stranger
asked again for a theme. "I have given you the theme already," said
Beethoven. "What,is that to be the theme!""Certainly-and a very good
one, too." The puzzledartistwas obligedto improviseas well as he could.
the
Shortlyafterwards, Fantasia,Op. 77, of Beethovenappeared,whichis
foundedon such a scale, and is merelythe fruitof Beethoven'shumorous
fancies. (1852, 65)
34. Lack of a closed tonal frame was by no means unusualin early-nineteenth(and in contemporary
centuryimprovisations
compositionslike Chopin'snotorious"two-key"pieces). For instance,note Czerny'sinstructions
(1983, 11)
"Preludes ShortFantasies"--"itis not necessary beginin the
and
to
concerning
samekey in whichone mustconclude"
-which he repeatswith regardto "Preludes of a Longerand More ElaborateType" (p. 19).

46

In his 1972editionof Schenker1914,OswaldJonasrectifiesa generalmisconceptionthat the Fantasy,Op. 77 is in G minor (for instance,New Grove
[2:400]gives "g/Bl" as the key):
Korrekterweise
sollte es heiBen: Fantasie in H dur, entsprechenddem
dem Thema und Variationen.Die Suche nach dem
Hauptteil, naimlich
Themaist ja der Inhaltdes improvisatorischen
Teiles der Fantasie.Dafiir
aucheine SkizzediesesWerkes,die mit Laufenin H durbeginnt.(p.
spricht
61n)
35. "Despite its multiplicityof theme-materials Fantasiapossesses an inner
the
and
unityanddisplaysa readilyrecognizable highlypoetic sequenceof thought
(Bekker 1925, 92).
throughout"
36. The OED definesunity (in the sense of literaryor artisticquality)as "agreementof the variouspartsof whichsomething composedso as to forma whole
is
whichexhibitssingleness designor effect;combination arrangement
of
or
which
producesthis, or the effect so produced"
(1989, 19:81).Its definitionof coherence is far less restrictive:
"harmonious
connexionof the severalparts,so that
the whole 'hangstogether'" (3:449). Note also Dr. Johnson'sdefinitionsof
unity("The state of being one. Concord;conjunction.Agreement;uniformity
. . .") and coherence ("Consistency in reasoning, or relating, so that one part

of the discoursedoes not destroyor contradict rest") (1755, n.p.).
the
37. Czerny'sanecdote, quoted in note 33, reveals the originalsignificance the
of
scales.
Anotherprominent
motive in Op. 77 is the repeated-note
figureon which
the B-majortheme is based, which also appearsin the Bb melody, in mm.
79-82 and 84-88, etc. Both this patternandthe scale motiveare presentin the
sketches.
38. It is striking the only elementsof the sketchesconcerned
that
withharmonic
(as
opposedto melodic)detailsfeaturea Bb in the bass (mm. 37 and 78) or are in
the key of C major, both being importantcomponentsof ex. 4's hypothetical
model.
improvisatory
39. Althoughin a strictsense this graphdepicts a first-levelmiddleground
strucin
ture, I referto it (andto otherslike it in the article)as a background partto
model on which
suggestits close relationto the "background"
improvisatory
the piece might have been based. Any anomaliesthat may result should be
viewed accordingly.A true middleground
graph of Op. 77 appearsin Rink
1992b,316-17.
EdwardLaufer(1988, 124-32) proposesa fundamentally
differentreading
of the firstpartof Op. 77, whichhe sees as prolonging i-III-v progression
a
in
G minor.The bass G eventuallyresolvesas an upperneighborto F# (root of V
of B minor/major),
abovewhichBb becomesthe leadingtone, A#. In his analdo
in
structure:
ysis, the first156measures not participate the fundamental
they
are simplya "long upbeatreachingfor the B-majorarrival"(p. 124), whereto
upon a 3-2-i descentguidesthe theme and variations the coda at m. 229.
While manydetailsof Laufer'sanalysisare elegant and persuasive,his attributionof a temporary
tonic statusto G minoris dubious,given the fleeting
of
appearance G minoritself (as we have seen, fantasiesoften begin in keys
other than the tonic) and the Bb theme's important "deceptive" formal

47

function. Moreover, I am not convinced that the "improvisatory model" constructed by Laufer could realistically have been employed by Beethoven,
whereas the "basic plan" shown in ex. 4 is not only like those used in many
forms of improvisation (see Clarke 1988 and Pressing 1988) but also touches
more closely upon the reality of the Fantasy as published and, more to the
point, as aurally perceived. (I am grateful to Joel Galand for drawing Laufer's
article to my attention.)
40. Information on Schubert's fantasies can be found in Brown 1951 and 1966, 85100; Weekley 1968; Durr 1969; Vogel 1971; Sams 1976; Godel 1979; Kinderman 1986, 75-82; and Rast 1988.
41. Note, however, that an 1823 critic of the "Wanderer" Fantasy censured Schubert for having "gone too far here and there in the matter of chord progressions
[those in mm. 8, 10, and 88-95], all of which may not be found tolerable by
every ear" (Deutsch 1946, 278).
42. "Sonatenform und Liedform kommen tiberein, lyrisches und dramatisches Gesetz halten sich in gegenseitiger Balance" (Godel 1979, 203).
43. Held by the Morgan Library, the sketches are published in facsimile along with
the fair copy (Osterreichische Nationalbibliothek): Fantasie in f-Moll D 940:
Faksimile-Ausgabe, ed. Hans-Joachim Hinrichsen (Tutzing, 1991).
44. See Dahlhaus's comments in note 31 on how the proliferation of thematic
procedures-"die Idee des Thematischen" -contributed to the decline of improvisation.
45. "Unlike the present Trio, which replaced it, the march was to have made a
second appearance after the recapitulation of the Scherzo" (Brown 1966, 98).
The end of the march (in D major), rather than the scherzo (which closes in F,
major), would therefore have led to the opening melody's reprise in F minor.
This is the only difference in tonal organization between the sketched and final
versions, although, as noted above, the Ct-C~ parallelism appears in both at
more immediate structural levels.
46. "Like an inspired improvisation, [the Polonaise-Fantasy] embraces a wide
range of characters-slow introduction, dance elements, sonata-like development, nocturne-like ornamental melody, 'slow movement'-and all within a design of apparent profligacy" (1985, 201).
47. Cook adds: "In terms of Schenkerian aesthetics that would mean that [the
Polonaise-Fantasy] really consists of two separate pieces, which seems quite a
reasonable conclusion since this is merely a translation to background level of
what Chopin did in his Polonaise, Op. 44, which has a complete Mazurka for
its middle section."
48. Other analysts (e.g., Hamburger 1966, 107ff.; Samson 1985, 200-211; and
Cook 1987, 336ff.) discuss features of the Polonaise-Fantasy that cannot be
treated here at length. Samson for instance emphasizes the importance of "thematic recall" in the piece (1985, 201), noting the numerous motivic connections
extending throughout (some of which feature in the graphs in exx. 9 and 1116).
"Thematic recall" works in conjunction with "tonal recall" to enhance the
sense of coherence. Chopin continually returns to the tonic harmony, often disguising it by variations in spelling and "quality" (e.g., mm. 17-22, 86-87, and

48

182-85 are written in Gt minor, not Ab minor) as well as in function (in the
"second nocturne," for instance, Gt minor acts not as i but as vi of B major).
Although these abundant references to "one, central tonality of A flat major"
balance and control the "relatively free succession of events" (Whittall 1987,
77), temporary confusion often results from the different functions assumed by
Ab major/Gt minor, which enhances the effect of vernunftige Betrigerey.
(Compare the similar use of Ft major/minor in mm. 46-50 and 57-61 of the
Barcarolle, discussed in Rink 1988b, 201.)
49. Chopin's Barcarolle has three themes: the first (A), in the tonic Ft major, enters after a short introduction based on the dominant; the second, B1, is in A
major (tIII), as is the third, B2. The improvisatory transition that follows, over
a dominant pedal, leads to a return of A, then B2' (now in the tonic and much
expanded in an exciting apotheosis), and finally, in the coda, B1", grounded in
the tonic by an Ft pedal note but otherwise harmonically discursive. Shown at
the background level in ex. 10, the tonal structure of the work-which is implicit in the arrangement of the three themes-is thus based on the underlying
progression I- III-V-I, which prolongs the primary melodic tone 5 throughout
the piece. This progression has special significance in Chopin's music, as analysis of the Polonaise-Fantasy will reveal. (Rink 1988b provides a more detailed

studyof Op. 60.)

50. This is but one of the differences between Op. 61 and Chopin's other
polonaises, differences that might be attributed to the generic hybrid of
polonaise and fantasy. The polonaise genre seems in any case not to have influenced Chopin's original conception of the work: the characteristic dance
rhythms in the piece as published appeared late in the sketching process, belonging not to the original layer but to a subsequent one. (See Kallberg 1985,
282.)
See Rink 1989 and 1992a for discussion of Chopin's early polonaises and the
emergence of "structural momentum" and "dynamic" background structures as
features of the composer's mature style.
51. This is the enharmonic function of B major, as it appears in the score. Although
Cook and Samson treat B major literally, the enharmonic equivalent is used
here in keeping with Chopin's own orthographic flexibility, revealed in both the
sketches (e.g., m. 56) and the Brandus Stichvorlage (mm. 231 and 249). Why
Chopin chose to write the slow section in B major rather than Cb major is unclear; possibly he did so to simplify the key signature (but note the awkward
inflection to A# major-not Bb major-that results in 160-6), or even to "disguise" the true structural function of the section for the sake of "rational deception."
52. The sketches (discussed at length in Kallberg 1985, Samson 1985 and 1988, and
Nowik 1978, 231-70) comprise eight leaves of fourteen-staff manuscript paper
(KK 815) which are in an unknown private collection, and a single page (KK
816) held in Warsaw by the Towarzystwo imienia Fryderyka Chopina. Other
primary sources for Op. 61 include the two Stichvorlagen prepared for Brandus
and for Breitkopf und Hartel. The former (KK 818), part of a private Paris
collection, is published in facsimile (Frederic Chopin Deux Nocturnes op. 48,
Polonaise-Fantaisie op. 61, ed. Jean-Jacques Eigeldinger [Yverdon-les-Bains,

49

was
1986]).Thismanuscript used to makethe Wesselcopy (now lost), whichin
turnservedas the basisfor the BreitkopfStichvorlage 817;see Eigeldinger
(KK
1984, 166). The latteris held by the BibliotekaNarodowain Warsaw.
53.
Includedamongthe passagesthatflowedmostfreelyfromChopin's are
pen
exactlythose that constitutethe most significant
pointsof overlapbetween
and the lyrical
the genres of polonaiseand fantasy:the long introduction
middlesection. The formalbasis of the generichybridwas thereforewell
established even before Chopin began sketching .... (1985, 283)

54. In discussing
Op. 61's genesis, Samsonconsiders"the projectionof ... codified perceptualstructures
into the realm of compositionalstrategies,even if
these are regarded subliminal.
as
himSucha projectionis explicitin Schenker
self and implicitin the workof manySchenkerians. the very least it would
At
be arguedthatChopinproceededfroman intuition the Ursatz"
of
(1988,58; cf.
Schmalfeldt
1990, 265).
55. This carry-over a structural
of
feature from sketches to final version recalls
Schubert's
draftof the Fantasyin F minor-specifically,the preservation the
of
structural
C$/DI-C motionjoiningthe end of the marchto the reprise,which,
despitea differenttonal context, functionsin the publishedversionas the link
between scherzoand finale.
56. This extensionwas originallysix measureslong, but Chopinadded two more
barsto emphasizeIIIt even further.
57. Note in ex. 16thatthe harmonic
aftermm.208-9 outlinesa descent
progression
in the sopranoforeshadowing inner-voice
the
melodyat the end of the piece, in
mm. 281-83 and 284-85.
58. Note also the motivicparallelism resultsfromtransposing slow section
that
the
to B major:the melodicascentfromb~ throughc to db in mm. 226-27 imitates
the harmonic
motionfrom the end of the slow sectionup to this point, i.e., B
major -> C major -> Db major.
See Jean-Jacques Eigeldinger, Chopin: pianist and teacher-as seen by his

pupils, trans.Naomi Shohetwith KrysiaOsostowiczand Roy Howat, ed. Roy
Howat (Cambridge,1986) for discussionof Chopin'spreferencefor B major
ratherthan the more usual C majorin his piano teachingand in the exercises
he draftedfor his unfinished
keyboardtreatise.
59. See Rink 1989for furtherconsideration Chopin's"structural
of
style" and its
relationto improvisation.

WORKS CITED
Abraham, Gerald. 1939. Chopin's Musical Style. London.
Adlung, Jacob. 1758. Anleitung zu der musikalischen Gelahrtheit. Erfurt.
Bach, C. P. E. 1949. Essay on the True Art of Playing Keyboard Instruments [Versuch iiber die wahre Art das Clavier zu spielen]. Trans. William J. Mitchell. New

York.
Bekker, Paul. 1925. Beethoven.Trans.M. M. Bozman.London.
Bent, Ian. 1986.HeinrichSchenker,Chopinand DomenicoScarlatti.MusicAnalysis 5/2-3: 131-49.

50

Brown, Maurice J. E. 1951. Schubert's "Wanderer" Fantasy. The Musical Times:
540-42.
. 1961. Schubert: Discoveries of the Last Decade. The Musical Quarterly
47/3: 293-314.
. 1966. Essays on Schubert. New York.
Carew, Derek. 1981. An Examination of the Composer/Performer Relationship in
the Piano Style of J. N. Hummel. 2 vols. Ph.D. diss., University of Leicester.
Christensen, Thomas. 1992. The Regle de l'Octave in Thorough-Bass Theory and
Practice. Acta Musicologica 64/2: 91-117.
Clarke, Eric. 1988. Generative Principles in Music Performance. In Generative
Processes in Music, ed. John A. Sloboda, pp. 1-26. Oxford.
Cook, Nicholas. 1987. A Guide to Musical Analysis. London.
Cooper, Barry. 1990. Beethoven and the Creative Process. Oxford.
Czerny, Carl. [1848]. School of Practical Composition Op. 600. Trans. John
Bishop. London.
. 1852. Farther Recollections of Beethoven. Cocks's Musical Miscellany
1/6: 65.
. 1970. On the Proper Performance of all Beethoven's Works for the Piano.
Ed. Paul Badura-Skoda. Vienna.
. 1983. A Systematic Introduction to Improvisation on the Pianoforte [Systematische Anleitung zum Fantasieren auf dem Pianoforte]. Trans. Alice L.
Mitchell. New York.
Dahlhaus, Carl. 1979. Was heisst Improvisation? In Improvisation und neue Musik,
ed. Reinhold Brinkmann, pp. 9-23. Mainz.
Deutsch, Otto. 1946. Schubert: A Documentary Biography. Trans. Eric Blom. London.
Diirr, Walther. 1969. Eine unbekannte Fantasie von Schubert. Osterreichische
Musikzeitung 24: 569-72.
Eigeldinger, Jean-Jacques. 1984. Autographes de Chopin inconnus. Revue musicale de Suisse romande 37/4: 154-71.
Fellerer, Karl. 1931. Das Partimentospiel. In International Society for Musical Research First Congress, Liege: Report, pp. 109-12. Burnham.
. 1932. Zur Geschichte der freien Improvisation. Die Musikpflege 2: 433-44.
. 1939. Gebundene Improvisation. Die Musik 31/6: 398-9.
. 1940. Der Partimento-Spieler. Leipzig.
Ferand, Ernst. 1938. Die Improvisation in der Musik. Zirich.
. 1961. Improvisation in Nine Centuries of Western Music. Cologne.
Godel, Arthur. 1979. Zum Eigengesetz der Schubertschen Fantasien. In SchubertKongreJ3Wien 1978, ed. Otto Brusatti. Graz.
Hamburger, Paul. 1966. Mazurkas, Waltzes, Polonaises. In Frederic Chopin: Profiles of the Man and the Musician, ed. Alan Walker, pp. 73-113. London.
Jenkins, Glyn. 1976. The Legato Touch and the "Ordinary" Manner of Keyboard
Playing from 1750-1850: Some Aspects of the Early Development of Piano
Technique. 2 vols. Ph.D. diss., University of Cambridge.
Johnson, Douglas, Alan Tyson, and Robert Winter. 1985. The Beethoven Sketchbooks. Ed. Douglas Johnson. Oxford.
Johnson, Samuel. 1755. A Dictionary of the English Language. London.

51

Jonas, Oswald. 1982. Introduction to the Theory of Heinrich Schenker (Einfiihrung
in die Lehre Heinrich Schenkers). Trans. and ed. John Rothgeb. New York.
Kallberg, Jeffrey. 1985. Chopin's Last Style. JAMS 38/2: 264-315.
Kinderman, William. 1986. Schubert's Tragic Perspective. In Schubert: Critical and
Analytical Studies, ed. Walter Frisch, pp. 65-82. Lincoln.
Kollmann, August. 1792. An Introduction to the Art of Preluding and Extemporizing in Six Lessons for the Harpsichord or Harp. London.
Laufer, Edward. 1988. On the Fantasy. Integral 2: 99-133.
Leichtentritt, Hugo. 1921. Analyse der Chopin'schen Klavierwerke, vol. 1. Berlin.
Lester, Joel. 1992. Compositional Theory in the Eighteenth Century. Cambridge,
Mass.
Lipiczky, Thom. 1985. Tihai Formulas and the Fusion of "Composition" and "Improvisation" in North Indian Music. The Musical Quarterly 71/2: 157-71.
Lissa, Zofia. 1963. Die Formenkreuzung bei Chopin. In The Book of the First International Musicological Congress Devoted to the Works of Frederick Chopin,
ed. Zofia Lissa, pp. 207-12. Warsaw.
Liszt, Franz. 1837. Lettres d'un bachelier es musique. A un poete voyageur. [Revue
et] Gazette Musicale, 12 f6vrier. Translated in New Grove, s.v. "Improvisation."
. 1852. F. Chopin. Paris.
Macdonald, Hugh. 1978. Fantasy and Order in Beethoven's Phantasie Op. 77. In
Modern Musical Scholarship, ed. Edward Olleson, pp. 141-50. Stocksfield.
Mazel, Lew. 1965. O pewnych cechach kompozycji w swobodnych formach
Chopina. Studia chopinowskie, pp. 251-58. Trans. Jerzy Popiel. Cracow.
Nardis, Camillo de, ed. 1933. Partimenti. Milan.
New Grove. 1980. The New Grove Dictionary of Music and Musicians. Ed. Stanley
Sadie. 20 vols. London.
Nottebohm, Gustav. 1887. Zweite Beethoveniana. Ed. Eusebius Mandyczewski.
Leipzig.
Nowik, Wojciech. 1978. Proces tw6rczy Fryderyka Chopina w swietle jego autografow muzycznych. Ph.D. diss., University of Warsaw.
OED. 1989. The Oxford English Dictionary. Second edn. Prepared by J. A. Simpson and E. S. C. Weiner. 20 vols. Oxford.
Oppen, Jurgen. 1971. Beethovens Klavierfantasie op. 77 in neuer Sicht. In Bericht
iiber den internationalen musikwissenschaftlichen Kongress Bonn 1970, ed. Carl
Dahlhaus et al., pp. 528-31. Kassel.
Ottenberg, Hans-Gunter. 1987. C. P. E. Bach. Trans. Philip J. Whitmore. Oxford.
Petri, Johann. [1767]. Anleitung zur practischen Musik. [Lauban].
. [1782]. Anleitung zur practischen Musik. 2nd edn. [Leipzig].
-Poniatowska, Irena. 1980. Improwizacja fortepianowa w okresie romantyzmu.
Szkice o kulturze muzycznej XIXw 4: 7-28.
Pressing, Jeff. 1988. Improvisation: Methods and Models. In Generative Processes
in Music, ed. John A. Sloboda, pp. 129-78. Oxford.
Quoika, Rudolf. 1958. Die Generalbassimprovisation nach Josef Seger. In Bericht
iiber den internationalen musikwissenschaftlichen Kongress Wien Mozartjahr
1956, ed. Erich Schenk, pp. 490-92. Graz.
Rast, Nicholas. 1988. Analysis of Structure in Schubert's Piano Duets. Ph.D. diss.,
University of London.
Reed, John. 1972. Schubert: The Final Years. London.

52

Ein
Die
Riemann,Hugo. 1910.BeethovensPrometheus-Musik. Variationenwerk.
Musik9/13: 19-34.
[ --

]. 1967. Riemann Musik Lexikon. Mainz.

Rink, John. 1988a.Review of Schenker1984. In MusicAnalysis7/2: 225-33.
-.

1988b. The Barcarolle: Auskomponierung and Apotheosis. In Chopin Stud-

ies, ed. Jim Samson,pp. 195-219. Cambridge.
. 1989. The Evolution of Chopin's "StructuralStyle" and its Relation to Im-

provisation.2 vols. Ph.D. diss., Universityof Cambridge.
. 1992a.TonalArchitecture the EarlyMusic.In TheCambridge
-in
Companion to Chopin,ed. Jim Samson,pp. 78-97 and 305-308. Cambridge.
. 1992b.The Rhetoricof Improvisation:
Beethoven'sFantasyOp. 77. In Secondo Convegno Europeo di Analisi Musicale: Atti, ed. Rossana Dalmonte and

MarioBaroni, pp. 303-17. Trento.
Rosen, Charles. 1972. The Classical Style. New York.

Salzer,Felix. 1962. Structural
Hearing.2 vols. New York.
. 1976. Haydn'sFantasiafrom the StringQuartet,Opus 76, No. 6. In The
MusicForum4: 161-94. New York.
Sams, Eric. 1976. Schubert's
piano duets. TheMusicalTimes117: 120-21.
Samson, Jim. 1985. The Music of Chopin. London.

. 1988.The composition-draft the Polonaise-fantasy: issue of tonality.
of
the
In ChopinStudies,ed. Jim Samson,pp. 41-58. Cambridge.
Schachter,Carl. 1988. Chopin'sFantasyOp. 49: the two-keyscheme. In Chopin
Studies,ed. Jim Samson,pp. 221-53. Cambridge.
Schenker, Heinrich. 1912. Beethovens neunte Sinfonie. Vienna.

. 1913(Op. 109), 1914(Op. 110), and 1915(Op. 111):Erliuterungsausgaben
der letzten fiinf Sonaten Beethovens. Revised edns., 1971-72. Ed. Oswald

Jonas. Vienna.
.1921. Der Tonwille 1.

.1922aand 1922b.Der Tonwille2 and 3.
.1923aand 1923b.Der Tonwille4 and 5.
. 1925 and 1926. Das Meisterwerk in der Musik, vols. 1 and 2. Munich.

.1954. Harmony[Harmonielehre].
Ed. Oswald Jonas. Trans. Elisabeth
MannBorgese. Chicago.
. 1976. A Contribution the Studyof Ornamentation Beitragzur Orto
[Ein
Trans.Hedi Siegel. In The MusicForum4: 1-139. New York.
namentik].
. 1977. OrganicStructure SonataForm [Vom Organischen Sonatenin
-der
form]. Trans. Orin Grossman. In Readings in Schenker Analysis and Other Ap-

proaches,ed. MauryYeston, pp. 38-53. New Haven.

-

. 1979. Free Composition (Der freie Satz). Trans. and ed. Ernst Oster. New

York.
-.

1984. J. S. Bach's Chromatic Fantasy and Fugue: Critical Edition with Com-

mentary.Trans.and ed. Hedi Siegel. New York.
Schleuning,Peter. 1971. TheFantasia.Trans.A. C. Howie. 2 vols. Cologne.
. 1973. Die Freie Fantasie. Goppingen.

Janet. 1990. Review of ChopinStudies(ed. Jim Samson).In Music
Schmalfeldt,
Theory Spectrum 12: 262-75.

Shedlock, J. S. 1909. Beethoven Sketches Hitherto Unpublished. The Musical
Times50/801:712-14.
53

Sorge, Georg. [1767]. Anleitung zur Fantasie, oder zu der schonen Kunst, das Clavier . . . aus dem Kopfe zu spielen. Lobenstein.
Suttoni, Charles. 1973. Piano and Opera: A Study of the Piano Fantasies Writtenon
Opera Themes in the Romantic Era. Ph.D. diss., New York University.

de
Reviewof the
Tarasti,Eero. 1984. Pourune narratologie Chopin.International
Aesthetics and Sociology of Music 15/1: 53-74.

2
Klaviermusik. vols. Stuttgart.
Uhde, Jiirgen.1968. Beethovens
de
Vanhulst,Henri. 1971.La pratique l'improvisation
d'apresles traitesde Clavier
de l'Empfindsamer Stil. Revue beige de musicologie 25: 108-53.
Vierling, Johann. 1794. Versuch einer Einleitung zum Praludiren fiir Ungetibtere
mit Beispielen. Leipzig.

Fantasie" FranzSchubert.Musikforvon
Vogel, JohannPeter. 1971.Die "Grazer
schung24: 168-72.
Otto. 1925.CarlPhilippEmanuelBach als Theoretiker. Vonneuer
In
Vrieslander,
Musik,ed. H. Grues, pp. 222-79. Cologne.
Robert. 1950.L'improvisation
au
Wangerm6e,
pianistique debutdu XIXesiecle. In
Miscellanea Musicologica: Floris van der Mueren, pp. 227-53. Ghent.

. 1970.Traditionet innovationdans la virtuositeromantique.
Acta Musico-

logica 42: 5-32.
Weekley, D. A. 1968. The One-Piano, Four-Hand Compositions of Franz Schubert: Historical and InterpretativeAnalysis. Ph.D. diss., Indiana University.

Whittall,Arnold. 1987. RomanticMusic. London.

54

