Yale University Department of Music

Hermeneutics and Energetics: Analytical Alternatives in the Early 1900s
Author(s): Lee A. Rothfarb
Source: Journal of Music Theory, Vol. 36, No. 1 (Spring, 1992), pp. 43-68
Published by: Duke University Press on behalf of the Yale University Department of Music
Stable URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/843909
Accessed: 16/12/2009 05:30
Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of JSTOR's Terms and Conditions of Use, available at
http://www.jstor.org/page/info/about/policies/terms.jsp. JSTOR's Terms and Conditions of Use provides, in part, that unless
you have obtained prior permission, you may not download an entire issue of a journal or multiple copies of articles, and you
may use content in the JSTOR archive only for your personal, non-commercial use.
Please contact the publisher regarding any further use of this work. Publisher contact information may be obtained at
http://www.jstor.org/action/showPublisher?publisherCode=duke.
Each copy of any part of a JSTOR transmission must contain the same copyright notice that appears on the screen or printed
page of such transmission.
JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide range of
content in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and facilitate new forms
of scholarship. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.

Duke University Press and Yale University Department of Music are collaborating with JSTOR to digitize,
preserve and extend access to Journal of Music Theory.

http://www.jstor.org

HERMENEUTICS AND ENERGETICS:
ANALYTICAL ALTERNATIVES IN
THE EARLY 1900s

Lee A. Rothfarb
I start, perhaps perilously, with the thorny question of musical
"content." What does music contain? One answer might be "notes."
After all, what else does music contain, in the literal sense, besides
notes? Yet that answer is too simplistic and spirituallyunsatisfyingfor
musicians, especially for performers, who customarilyinsist on playing more than "just the notes." Perhaps we can pose the question differently: what does music "mean"?Now we are asking, not just about
content, but about symbolic content, thus raising the aesthetic ante
considerably. The notion of symbolic content takes an already thorny
question and turns it into a veritable cactus. In trying to handle it, no
matter which way we grasp, no matter how delicately, some aesthetic
bloodletting is inevitable.
Several nineteenth-centuryauthors tried to characterizeand define
the content of music. Many agreed that music reflects interior life.
Hegel, for example, said, "Music's content is the subjective inner
self," "the pure resounding of the inner life."' At one point, he connected music with emotions: music "extends its range to cover every
specific emotion of the soul, every degree of happiness, merriment,
humor, moodiness, rejoicing and jubilation."The goal of music, then,
43

was "to make this inwardlyveiled life and energy echo ... in notes."2
Other authors, such as Ferdinand Hand, wrote similarly of music's
content as "the direct expression of inner life," and as "feeling having
become sound."3
It was not uncommon in the early 1900s for writers to offer vividly
descriptive and pictorial accounts of music, as did, for instance,
E. T. A. Hoffmann, who referred to Haydn's "vastgreen woodlands"
with "laughing children peering out from behind the trees," to
Mozart's "brightpurple luster of night," and to Beethoven's dancing
figures of the spirit realm, "flashingand sparkling, evading and pursuing one another."4We understand today that we must read Hoffmann and others of his time (e.g., Tieck, Wackenroder, Schlegel)
carefullybecause for them music was unique among the arts precisely
for its transcendent qualities.5 However, some early nineteenthcentury journalisticwriters and aestheticianstook such poeticizations
too literally. Eduard Hanslick, probably the best known midnineteenth-centuryauthor to addressthe issue of musical content, discredited such poeticizations and exhorted aestheticians to focus on
purely musical processes. In Vom Musikalisch-Schonen(On the Musically Beautiful, 1854), he warned against taking programmaticdescriptionsof music literally. To do so would mean listening to music in
a "state of waking dreaminess."Enjoying a symphonybecomes, then,
according to Hanslick, much like enjoying a warm bath. Instead of
music, Hanslick wryly recommended ether or chloroformfor superior
effects.6
Hanslick'smid-centuryrevision of music aesthetics was widely read
and elicited various responses, positive and negative. Any discussion
of musical content should touch on Hanslick, and this is especially so
in the case of this essay since the music-theoreticalalternativesnamed
in its subtitle are, in the one instance, a challenge to Hanslick's views,
and in the other, a fulfillment of them.
It would take us too far afield to explore all the prickly questions
raised by the cactus of musical content and meaning, and there is no
dearth of literature on the subject. Instead, we will touch selectively
on relevant issues as a foil for discussing the assumptionsand analytical practices of two early twentieth-century authors, musicologist
Hermann Kretzschmar (1848-1924), and composer-theorist August
Halm (1869-1929). The two alternatives mentioned in the subtitle of
my essay, hermeneutics and energetics, characterize their respective
analytical orientations. For the moment, we will let those characterizations stand without comment, and returnto clarifythem after filling
in some background.
Hanslick's basic premise is that music is not, in Leonard Meyer's
words, referentially expressive, at least not in any specific and defin44

able way: no laughing children, no purple luster or dancing figures.7
Such images arise by association and reside in a listener's mind, Hanslick insisted, not in the music. Emotions and images may have stimulated the composer, but they are untranslatableand thus inaccessible
to us.8 Aestheticians and listeners who assert that music contains or
expresses emotions, or depicts images, are confusing musical content
with its psychological effects. Notes are indeed music's sole content,
but not just as raw acoustical material. Music consists of "artistically
combined" notes which, according to context, wax and wane in
strength, attract and repel each other, and form lines that widen
and contractin a lively dynamicinterplay. This interplay, Hanslick declared, is what "presents itself to our mental vision."9 Music in this
view possesses "embodied"meaning-again Meyer-based on the relationships and dynamic implications of tones.10 It is thus not referentially but "absolutely"expressive, "absolute"in the sense of being
musically self-sufficient. Dry grammaticalrules in theory books may
suggest to aestheticians-and especially to musicians-that music's
content resides someplace other than in notes. And Hanslick conceded that any emotions or images we intuit may play a role in the
pre-compositional origins or in the performance of a work."1However, he affirmed that composition itself is "constructive . . . purely
objective," and is guided by technique alone, not feelings. Consequently, to quote Hanslick's well-known phrase, "Sonorous forms in
motion are the single and sole content of music."12
During the decades straddling1900, a resurgence of Romantic sensibilities in Europe challenged Hanslick's absolutist notion of music,
perhaps because readers interpreted "form"too narrowly as routine
formulas and stereotypicalschemata, although he warned against that
interpretation. More likely, readers rejected as too cerebral Hanslick's thesis that composing was a purely technical activityand that any
affective content inhered in the performanceand listener.13In a 1907
handbook on music aesthetics, for example, Bruckner advocate Karl
Grunsky proclaimed that "we barely pay attention to Hanslick any
longer" since nearly all musicians admit and defend the idea that
music is expressive.l4 (Despite Grunsky's criticism of Hanslick, the
two men actually end up saying much the same thing, namely that
music expresses indeterminate and disembodied feelings-in Grunsky's words, "emotionless emotions." Still, Grunsky'scritical allusion
to Hanslick is importantevidence of contemporaryanti-formalisttendencies.15) In an article of 1921 outlining new goals for musical understanding, Arthur W. Cohn complained about the debilitating
effects on society of decades of Positivism. "The 'intellectualism'that
has penetrated art must be eliminated," Cohn urged, "and 'emotional'
life . . . reawakened."'6 Around 1900 the search was on for a more
45

spirituallysatisfyingmusical content. Kretzschmarfound it in a theory
of thematic affects, and Halm in a concretized version of Hanslick's
musical dynamism.
Kretzschmarrejected the notion of absolute music. He obliquely
mocked Hanslick when he remarked that music was "more than a
playground for sonorous forms in motion." For Kretzschmar,music
was communicative, and form was merely the "husk and shell" for
communicating a spiritual content.17 To translate this spiritual communication, Kretzschmarproposed "hermeneutic"analysis, an interpretive methodology that "distills the affects from the tones and
verbally conveys the structure of their development." Penetrating
"past the tones and sonic forms to the affects," he said, "elevates the
sensuous pleasure, the formal work, to a spiritual activity."18Since
Kretzschmarconsidered form only insofar as it "aids in clarifyingthe
type of emotive and intellectual activity of the composer," he scoffed
at the notion of logical formal development as a "fat morsel from the
pig-Latin of aesthetics."'9 Kretzschmar dismissed an independent
logic of formal development, except as a manifestation of spiritual
content. He sought an understandingof music that transcendedits formal aspect-'understanding' in the sense that the philosopher
Wilhelm Dilthey used that word.20 After discussing one of
Kretzschmar'shermeneutic analyses, we will return to Dilthey, who
around 1900 was the principalcommentatoron hermeneuticsand 'understanding'.
Kretzschmar'shermeneutic analysis involves first interpreting the
affective content of local events-for example, motives, themes,
rhythms, and simple chord progressions-and then determining the
spiritualcontent of the whole by interpretingthe cumulative effect of
local events. His demonstration piece is Bach's C-major fugue from
Book 1 of the Well-TemperedClavier.
According to Kretzschmarthe cautious but deliberate ascent of a
fourth at the head of the subject (cl-fl), coupled with the quicker descent at the tail, gives the theme a "melancholy"content."21The two
"energetic" ascending fourth leaps (e'-al, d'-g') strive to overcome
that affect, though without success, as indicated by the overall descending trend of the two fourths. This miniature struggle within the
subject becomes the spiritual content of the fugue as a whole: the
gradualtriumphof energetic determinationover melancholy resignation.
The process occurs in four stages, the first two representingunsuccessful attempts to overcome the melancholy affect (mm. 1-6, 7-14),
and the last two representingthe triumph(mm. 14-19, 19-27). In the
first stage, the soprano sweeps up to g2 (m. 4) but then sinks back,
along with the other voices (m. 5). In the second stage, an energetic
46

IV

r

i~api

-

jI

r:^^g^SB-^-

^
Lr

1y

^J^nJ

1fT

-

-rf

Example 1. Bach: Fugue in C Major, WTC I

47

J
(^= _ I -I of_ r_ O-1 I' m"

t

('d

rr
v_.

~~ET~I~-

m

1

Example 1 (continued)

=J

7

..r--K11
Or

48

1 1 -

I

I

Example 1 (continued)
stretto renews the effort to break free (m. 7). The soprano climbs up
to a peak by sequencing the tail motive up a step (m. 8). However, the
companion voice in the stretto (tenor) fails to follow through with the
ascending sequence. The tenor stalls on el (m. 8), and the effort
founders on a poignant dissonance at the downbeat of m. 9. The modulation to A minor in m. 11, foreshadowed by the wrenching c2-g$1
outline in the soprano there, foils the enterprise and dashes hopes of
breaking the affect (mm. 11-14).
By referringto readily perceivable phenomena like melodic direction and register (mm. 4-5), imitation and a dissonance (mm. 7-9),
and a minor-key modulation (mm. 10-11), Kretzschmartraces the affective discourse in the first half of the fugue. Hanslick would probably recoil in horrorfrom Kretzschmar'semotive interpretations.The
evidence offered is indeed a bit thin and the conclusions speculative.
However, if we look closer at mm. 1-14, we can locate some technical
phenomena that strengthen the analysis.
49

We will start with the subject. The ascent from scale degree 1 to 4
at its beginning hints at subdominant harmony, which is tonally less
"energetic"than the strong i-S outline found near the beginning of
That helps to explain
many subjects of the Well-TemperedClavier.22
Kretzschmar'smelancholy affect, though I have shifted the emphasis
from mood or feeling to energetic content. The descending resolution
from fl to el in m. 1 could imply a plagal progression, IV-I, which has
a more subdued effect than an ascent from fl to gl, indicating an energetic IV-V progression. Kretzschmarfinesses these details by highlighting conspicuous features, like melodic direction and register, that
invite dramatization.
In referringto the buildup in m. 4 and the downswing in m. 5, he
might have pointed out the chromatic note F$ (#4) in the applieddominant progression at the registral peak, and the immediate withdrawalof F# and entrance of Bb in the applied dominant to IV at the
downswing. Those events imply an escalation toward the energetic
dominantfollowed by a de-escalation towardthe more placid subdominant.
In the second stage, we might point out the dissonances on each
tied sixteenth-note of the subject in m. 8; these tied notes were consonant at analogous spots in m. 3 (beat 4), m. 5 (beat 2), and m. 6
(beat 4). Their reinterpretationas dissonances in m. 8 heightens the
tension of the stretto and so contributesto the overall drive of the passage. Furthermore, the poignant b2-f2augmented fourth outlined in
the soprano at mm. 8-9 consummates the tension generated by the
preceding series of dissonances. Hence the effectiveness of
Kretzschmar'se-f "crisis"on the downbeat of m. 9. The dynamic implications of the musical events and the logic of their succession is
clear. Less clear is whether the whole escalation can be interpreted as
a valiant, but failed, attempt to break an assumed melancholy affect.
Lest Kretzschmarappear ridiculous, we should keep in mind that,
as an educationist, he was addressing musical amateurs.23They no
doubt welcomed the intelligibility of the fugue analysis and found it
satisfying. Perhaps he was aware of the supplementary analytical
points made above. If not, he may have intuited them and framed his
remarksas he did for pedagogical as well as ideological reasons. Like
others of his generation, Kretzschmar reacted to the infiltration of
Positivism and the methods of the natural sciences into the realm of
the humanities, or Geisteswissenschaften, usually translated as
"human studies." The leading spokesman for distinguishing the humanities from the naturalsciences (Naturwissenschaften) Wilhelm
was
Dilthey, to whom we now return.
Dilthey devoted a large portion of his career to setting forth the
what
scope, ideology, and methodology of the Geisteswissenschaften,
50

we today call the humanities and social sciences (cultural-intellectual
and socio-politicalhistory, culturalanthropology,psychology, art criticism, aesthetics, and related fields). The subject matter of the human
studies, according to Dilthey, is the "socio-historicalreality," more
specifically, "everything on which man has actively impressed his
stamp"-i.e., those things that embody the activity and hence bear
signs of the human spirit. The subject matter of the natural sciences,
by contrast, is the naturalworld, embracinga "realitywhich has arisen
While the natural
independently of the activity [Wirken]of spirit."24
sciences and human studies appear to deal with different areas of
study-physical as opposed to spiritual-their subject matter may,
and often does, overlap. Rock formations, for example, may be studied from either the geological or anthropologicalperspective, celestial
motions from either the astronomical or astrological perspective.
However, while the scientist would focus on natural properties and
processes, the humanist would focus on the meaning (e.g., cultural,
historical, or religious) imparted by the human spirit to objects and
events as a product of "reflection"(Besinnung) and "livedexperience"
(Erlebnis), the mediatory links between the outer and inner worlds.25
The natural sciences and human studies also differ epistemologically. Dilthey characterizedthe difference by distinguishingbetween
'explaining' (Erkliren), the norm for scientists, and 'understanding'
Scientistsexplain things by first
(Verstehen),the norm for humanists.26
elemental components, then constructing the unity of
investigating
natural phenomena with hypotheses about causal connections. Humanists understand things holistically, by studying different sorts of
meaningful communications produced by humans.27Hypotheses are
unnecessaryin the human studies since, as Dilthey held, the inherent
unity of the human psyche is a given, as is the unity of its communications, its culturalexpressions. Humanistscome to know political figures, artists, and their cultural expressions directly, as one mind
comes to know another, by "rediscovering the I in the Thou," as
Dilthey put it. This knowledge is achieved by mental self-projection
(Sichhineinversetzen)--an identification with the cultural conditions
that produced the communication and an immersion in the communication itself.28 Self-projection is possible because, according to
Dilthey, humans share certain psychic traits and structuresthat transcend temporal and cultural boundaries.
Everyword . .. every gesture ... every workof art and every historical deed is intelligible because the people who express themselves
themhave somethingin comthroughthem and those who understand
mon; the individualalwaysexperiences,thinks, and acts in a common
sphere and only there does he understand.29
51

Dilthey's epistemology for the human studies took as a point of
departure the British school of psychology developed by Locke, Berkeley, and Hume. However, Dilthey considered their empiricalrationalistic approach too restrictive. Human understanding, he
believed, is shaped by a psyche that not only reasons but also feels and
wills, and this under specific historicaland culturalconditions. Dilthey
put it this way:
No real blood flowsin the veins of the knowingsubjectconstructed
by
Locke, Hume, and Kant but ratherthe dilutedextractof reason as a
mere activityof thought.A historicalas well as psychological
approach
to whole humanbeings led me to explainknowledgeand its concepts
... in terms of the manifoldpowers of a being that wills, feels, and
thinks...

30

Researchers in the human studies gain knowledge by examining
what Dilthey called "life expressions" (LebensdufJerungen),
cultural
phenomena such as political events and documents, literature, art
works, and so forth. Of the three types of cultural expressionsconcepts, actions, and "expressions of lived experience"
(Erlebnisausdriicke)-the last are especially valuable. When fixed in
writing, as with music, they permit us to return to them repeatedly,
and so allow us to evolve an "understanding" the psychic nexus that
of
produced them. Understanding"runsinverse to the course of production," Dilthey said, leading from a cultural expression-an art work,
for example-back to its origins. A complementarycognitive process,
"re-experiencing"(Nacherleben), completes the interpretive cycle by
leading "forwardalong the line of the [creative] events."31The process of re-experiencingmay itself be creative, possibly even transcending the original, authorial experience and intention. Following
Friedrich Schleiermacher,the "father"of nineteenth-centuryhermeneutics, Dilthey indicated that with historical perspective and interpretive insight, the researcher, through a "divinatory"process, may
come to know an author better than he knew himself.32
Our detour into Dilthey's human studies suggests parallels with
Kretzschmar'sideas. Early in his career, Dilthey recommended a psychological, divinatoryapproachto the analysis of cultural expressions
as a way of accessing their interior. Kretzschmar,too sought to disclose the spiritual content of music-for him, its affects-in order to
grasp its logic and essence. Like Dilthey, Kretzschmaralso spoke of
arriving at an "understanding"of art works through "aural selfprojection" (Sich Hineinhoren).33Kretzschmarassumed a mental affinity between music and listeners. "When the ear hears and the eye
sees," he says, "the spirit always hears and sees with them."34
52

In an early essay on poetics (1887), about twenty-five years before
Kretzschmar'sarticles on musical hermeneutics, Dilthey approached
literature from a similar, affective point of view:
Since the formativeprocessesof the artisticimagination produced
are
mustbe soughtin
by the play of feelings, the basis of theirexplanation
an analysisof feelings .... An analysisof feeling thus containsthe
key to the explanationof artisticcreativity.35
Whateveris formedfrom feeling excites feeling again, and does so in
the same mannerthoughwith diminishedforce.36
In an essay of 1892, on the evolution of aesthetics, Dilthey reinforced the psychological view. He wrote:
We spontaneously inevitablyattributesomethinginner to what is
and
to sense as outer. The essenceof aestheticapprehension creand
given
ation, the relationof ... inner and outer, is based on this. ... It is
mainly the relationsof our emotions to our reflex mechanismwhich
themselves
providethe basisfor the fact that those emotionsdischarge
in expressions,gestures,and tonal relationships, that we can then
and
alwaysread back somethinginner in such outer manifestations.The
schematic correlations found in speech between intensity, pitch,
tempo, rhythm,and the emotions are especiallyeffective in music.37
Both Dilthey and Kretzschmarspoke of affective content and reverberative experience in understandingart works, Dilthey in analyzing
the psychological genesis of art, and Kretzschmarin revealing the affective content of music.
Late in Dilthey's career, his interest shifted from the interior origins of cultural expressions to their exterior structure. He warned
against the "common error"of equating "our knowledge of the inner
side with the course of psychic life, that is, with psychology." In contrast to the 1887 essay just cited, around 1910 Dilthey now said of
poetry,
whatis expressedare not the interiorprocessesin the poet, but a structure createdin these processesyet separablefromthem. . . . Thusthe
object with whichliteraryhistoryand poetics is involvedis whollydistinct from psychicprocessesin the poet or in his readers. A psychic
structureis realized here, which enters the world of the senses, and
whichwe understand
througha retreatfrom that world[into the mental origins].38
Dilthey called this exterior structure a "dynamicsystem," a loose
but fitting translationof Wirkungszusammenhang. characterizedit
He
as "a sequence of states, interiorly determined, presupposing each
53

other so that higher levels are built on lower ones."39The notion of a
dynamic system is important for Halm, as we shall see when we turn
to him shortly.
The idea of a dynamic system connotes a teleological form, where
each event functions organically within the whole. Earlier, I showed
that Kretzschmar'saffective analysis of the Bach fugue might be interpreted as such a dynamic system. I referred there to greater and
lesser levels of energy in harmonic progressions and in levels of dissonance. I turned Kretzschmar'saffective interpretation, which follows Dilthey's early, psychological ideas, into an energetic one, in
accordancewith Dilthey's later, "hermeneutic"ideas. Dilthey's interest in hermeneutics goes back to around 1860 and re-emerged around
1900, shortly before Kretzschmar published his essays on musical
hermeneutics.40

If Kretzschmarknew Dilthey's 1900 essay on hermeneutics, he apparently chose to pursue his own, unrelated-indeed ideologically
antithetical-mode of hermeneutic analysis as a latter-daydoctrine of
affections. He confirmed this when he stated that hermeneutics is
nothingbut an attemptto carryout the old doctrineof affectionsfor an
entire piece, that is to say, to trace the intentionsof the composer
based on the characterof the theme.41
This approachis contraryto Dilthey's mature ideas. Dilthey aimed
hermeneutic analysis primarily at linguistic creations, since, he explained, "the inner life of man finds its complete, exhaustive, and objectively understandable expression only in language." Dilthey thus
concluded that hermeneutics is "the methodology for the interpretation of written literarymonuments."42
Furthermore,he acknowledged
the importanceof the so-called "hermeneuticcircle," the thesis that a
synoptic whole can be understood only in light of its component parts,
and yet, conversely, the parts can ultimately be understood only once
the whole is grasped.43 Kretzschmar, however, considered hermeneutic analysis an additive process. He wrote,
The task of analyzingthe sense of 400 measuresis essentiallyno different from doing it for four or eight measures .... For the whole is
the sum of individualpassages.44
This would surely make Gestaltpsychologiststurn over in their graves.
However, when Kretzschmarwrote about musical hermeneutics, Gestalt psychology was not even out of the intellectual womb, although
Wilhelm Wundt, Ernst Mach, Christian von Ehrenfels, and Dilthey
54

had prepared the way for Gestalt psychology long before its "birth"
around 1910.
Finally, Kretzschmar'sideas are completely at odds with Dilthey's
views on music and its interpretation. In a 1910 commentary on musical understanding, Dilthey declared,
In the historicalstudy of music, the object is not the psychicprocess
but
that lies behindthe musicalwork, the psychological, rathersomethe
that
thing objective, specifically tonal nexus [Tonzusammenhang]
arises in imaginationas an expression .... Musicalratherthan psychologicalrelationshipsform the object of the study of musical ...
works and theory.45
The composer lives in an exclusively musical world, Dilthey insisted, not in the world of feelings. The sign and the signified, form
and content, are for Dilthey one and the same in music. "There is no
duality of lived experience and music," he explained, "no double
world .... Genius is simply living in the tonal sphere, as though this
alone existed." Whoever seeks a path from the composer's experience
to music, he warned, follows a "false beacon," for "there is no determinate path from lived experience to music."46Clearly, Dilthey reversed himself in the search for a mode of interpretive analysis. Over
the course of a decade, he shifted his attention from the shadowy interior of creative processes and their manifestationsin art to the more
luminous exterior of dynamic systems. Kretzschmar'stwo essays on
hermeneuticsfall chronologicallyin the middle and toward the end of
that shift. In 1902, when Kretzschmar'sfirst essay was published, he
may not have known Dilthey's work. After 1904, however, a year before the second essay was published, he may well have known it since
both men were then teaching at the Berlin university.47
At the outset of this essay I touched on the issue of musical content
and summarizedHanslick's ideas on the subject. In short, he is a nonreferential expressionist (not a pure "absolutist,"as some have maintained). He argued that music has no external content, emotive or
otherwise, but rather consists solely in a dynamic discourse of tones
that, as such, can be expressive. Kretzschmaremotionalized that dynamic discourse into an affective discourse, which for him was music's
"spiritual content." He referred to intramusical evidence, albeit
scanty, and defined an ostensibly non-referentialist position. However, the affect-based, anthropomorphiclanguage puts him in the referential camp. Dilthey focused initially on psychologicalaspects of the
creative process and formulated an emotive-referentialistview. Late
in life, he shifted toward a hermeneuticsbased on the formalistnotion
of an objectified dynamic psyche, a "dynamicsystem." Accordingly,
55

Dilthey, sounding much like Hanslick, then describedmusic as "a free
agreement of figureswhich first attractand then repulse each other."48
*

*

*

Hanslick was primarily a music critic and aesthetician, Dilthey a
philosopher. Their ideas on music, though insightful and suggestive,
nevertheless lack technical substance. Even Hanslick, who had musical trainingand knew music literature, did not employ technical analysis to concretize his aesthetic claims. Hanslick's aesthetic and
Dilthey's hermeneutic proposals found music-analyticalexpression in
the writings of August Halm.
Halm's work differs essentially from those of his contemporaries.
In contrast to the theoretical premises of Riemann and Schenker, for
example, Halm's premises are largely aesthetic rather than technical.
Further, Halm stuck to conventional analytical tools and symbology
rather than devising new ones. Unlike Kretzschmar, Halm deliberately avoided emotive language, characteristically
urgingus to "guard
Philistines, who employ music for nervous conagainst being genteel
vulsions, for 'inner experiences,' . . . essentially as a substitute for
emotional life."49
Like Dilthey, Halm also rejected psychological analysis. "One
ought not to take the psychological element in music for the logical
element," he warned, and remarkedfacetiously that if the composer's
mental state is the ultimate test of musical quality, "the psychiatristis
declared the rightful judge of music."50Like Hanslick, Halm considered dynamic activity music's sole content. He denied any "fictional
content behind musical utterances ... as if the meaning of music
could lie in something other than the music." "We have a drama of
forces before us," he observed, "not a drama of persons or personifications."51
Halm also followed Hanslick in maintainingthat perfection of form is the composer's main goal, the understandingof form
the listener's chief task.
These declarations may sound like so many arm-chairmeditations
and in another's hands might remain so. But Halm is not content with
lofty-sounding aesthetic pronouncements. As an active composer,
performer, author, and, above all, teacher, he illustrated his ideas
with numerous, close analyses in which, rather than emotionalizing
musical events, he dynamicizedthem. To Halm's ear, musical events
represented energetic values that sum cumulatively to a teleological
dynamic network, which we call "form";this depiction recalls Hanslick's sonorous forms in motion and Dilthey's dynamic system. Musical content for Halm, then, was the continuum of streamingforce. As
he put it, "the . . . drama of dynamics suffices fully for me, is for me
56

the actuallyconcrete element."52Halm's analysis of parts of Beethoven's "Waldstein" sonata, will give an idea of what he meant by a
"dramaof dynamics."
Halm's first objective here is to explain the escalatory logic of the
opening twenty-three measures.53Because the first two phrases correspond thematically, Halm hears an overarching,harmonicallyrecessive movement from C in m. 1 to Bb in m. 5 that overrides the
association of the unrelated G and Bb harmonies between the two
phrases (mm. 4-5). The harmonically progressive tendencies of the
two local ascending-fifth progressions, from C-G (mm. 1-3) and
Bb-F (mm. 5-7), are offset by the overarching,or translocal,connection from C-Bb. The intrusive G-Bb connection and the tonicdominant progression transplanted to the foreign key of Bb major
generate tonal tension, calling for subsequent redirection and resolution. The redirection comes with the expansive dominant in mm.
9-11, enhanced by accelerated rhythmas well as by spatiallyconfined,
repeated melodic figures and registral extremes in both hands. Halm
interpretsthe re-orientationtoward C throughthe extended dominant
harmonyas a logical result of the disorientingtonal tension generated
by the Bb passage. The resolution comes with a dramatic arrival on
the resonant, mid-range C-octave in m. 12. The modal shift to minor
hereabouts is appropriatesince it sustains tension, invoking the urge
for resolution to major. The accumulated tension is discharged with
the C-majorharmonyof m. 14. Like the reorientingdominant in mm.
9-11, the return to tonic is a logical outcome of previous events.
The dynamic phase starting in m. 14 absorbs the tension from the
first phase and escalates beyond it. Surface details-the higher register, shorter durational values, and the replacement of the previous
hammer-stroke style with a fast rocking motion in both handsmodify the original thematic statement, signaling heightened tension
and promoting the ongoing escalation. The deeper escalation, involving harmony, has again to do with the local versus the now widened,
translocal context. The ascending C-D-minor progression that encompasses mm. 14-18 clearly escalates over the descending C-Bb
progression in the earlier, parallel phase. While the translocal C-Bb
movement in mm. 1-5 neutralizes the energy generated by its interior
ascending-fifthprogressions, the translocal C-D-minor movement in
mm. 14-20 enhances its interior ascendingfifths, firstfrom C to G harmony, then from G to D between the phrases, and further from D to
A. This gradual ascent surpasses the harmonic events of the opening
in a continuous and deliberate escalation of the dynamic discourse.
Besides the intensificationjust described, there is yet another, less
apparent one. The G-D-minor association between the members of
57

12

r

'

If

I I

I

I

1

19

Exfamplr

2

^ther

cresc.

Example 2. Beethoven: Sonata Op. 53 ("Waldstein")
58

p

Allegrocon brio

I

-t

i2Sr

(')1

rJI

Ij
LLJJJ':

5:

1 -if11PP1

'-I

~~~ ~
~

I

~

CE1

rr,

~ ~ ~ ~~~~L

2
Example (cotinue
d)
Example 2 (continued)
59

the second phrase pair escalates over the analogous G-Bb association
in the first pair. This interpretation seems counterintuitive at first,
since the mediant-relatedG and Bb harmonies are more remote, and
would thus seem more energetic, than the fifth-relatedG and D harmonies. However, precisely because the connection between G and
Bb harmoniesis remote, we tend to disassociatethem. We hear across
this harmonic cleft and, based on thematic criteria, associate the Bb
harmony with the C harmony in m. 1, creating the translocal C-Bb
progression mentioned earlier. The fifth-related G and D harmonies
in mm. 17-18, on the other hand, invite association. The G-D link is
more energetic than G-BI, Halm explains, due to the implicit B-F
tritone in the voice leading. Furthermore, the G-D link produces a
more complex associative network of harmonies than before, consisting of the local G-D connection overlaid with the translocalC-D connection. The greater associative complexity and the F-B tritone in the
second dynamic phase escalate over the events in the first.
The current escalation peaks on the augmented-sixthchord in m.
22, which preparesthe dominant of an implied E-minor harmony. The
phase ends when in m. 35 the key of E major arrivesinstead, echoing
the modal reversals between C major and C minor in the first phase.
Although locally the cumulative tension subsides when E major sets
in, globally the underlyingtension between C major and E major remains high. The global tension persists up until the end of the exposition, and then dissipatesin two stages. First, E major reverts back to
E minor, graduallyreducingthe tension. The remainingtension is dischargedwhen G-major harmonyenters just before the repeat sign and
leads back to C.54
Halm spoke of forces and their unfolding as intramusicalproperties. However, since the forces reverberatein our psyche, the dynamic
drama stimulates a corresponding cognitive drama. Halm continuously re-evaluates the aural impact of local events in light of previous
and anticipated ones. According to Halm, the cross-referential dynamic network triggers a continuous interplay of retroauditive and
proauditiveinterpretations.For example, on hearing m. 5 we retroauditively connected the Bb harmonywith the C harmonyin m. 1 to create the overarching C-Bb progression. The anomalous Bb harmony
stimulateda proauditiveanticipationof harmoniesto redirect the passage back toward C. Energies arise and are either left unresolved or
appear contextually resolved, only to be reactivated by the retroauditive implications of later events. Musical understandingbuilds up
progressivelyout of the dynamic reciprocitybetween local and translocal events as we shuttle back and forth over an aural "hermeneutic
circle." Following Dilthey, we could say that we come to "understand" the dynamic network and then "re-experience"its teleological
60

unfolding. Dilthey would say we are re-experiencing the "psychic
nexus" (Seelenzusammenhang),externalized as a "dynamic system"
(Wirkungszusammenhang).
For Halm, forces are the content of music. They intensify and deintensify to produce a dynamic drama. Like Hanslick, Halm resisted
the lure of emotive interpretations. He condemned programmusic as
aesthetically corrupt and musically ruinous-"no intention can make
up for invention," as Hanslick had said.55 Analyses based on programs, emotive or otherwise, thus legitimize musical ruin. Accordingly, analysis should focus exclusively on what Halm, following
Dilthey and others, called the "objective spirit" of the artwork-the
dynamic system. Anything else amounts to Halm's "nervous convulsions," Dilthey's "false beacon," or Hanslick's "ether."
*

*

*

Kretzschmarand Halm wrote at a time when, after roughly a 150year evolution, syntactic analysis had become quite sophisticated. But
that sophistication, based on the model of the naturalsciences, tended
to resolve distinctively human qualities of music into formalized abstractions. Kretzschmarand Halm chose to follow the methodology of
the human studies instead. Although both men relied on syntactic
analysisto some extent, they considered it insufficientfor dealing with
products of an emotive, volitive psyche. Grammaticalinterpretation
needed to be supplemented by what Dilthey called "psychological"
interpretation, a penetration to the psychic nexus.56 Schenker's linear
progressions, and Urlinie, for example, impressed Halm as revelatory
grammaticalinsights. But such progressions, with all of their implicit
dynamicqualities, were for Halm no substitutefor the dramaof forces
in which each section of music has a determinate dynamic character
and logical role in a processive form.57
For Kretzschmarand Halm music was not just a product of syntactic ingenuity, not simply the unfolding of Nature-whether of Riemann's harmonic functions and agogics, or of Schenker's primordial
triad. Rather, music was an "expressionof lived experience," the unfolding of a psychic nexus. In moving from analysis to interpretation
of such expressions-from explanation to understanding-more than
the "diluted extract of reason" is required in the cognitive process. In
going beyond the safety of purely syntactic analysis, Kretzschmarand
Halm accepted the risk of some aesthetic bloodletting in exchange for
real blood flowing in the veins of listeners who not only reason, but
also feel and will.

61

NOTES
1. Peter le Huray and James Day, eds., Music and Aesthetics in the Eighteenth and

Early NineteenthCenturies(Cambridgeand New York, 1981), 346. Georg
Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel, Aesthetics: Lectures on Fine Arts, trans. T. M. Knox

(Oxford, 1988), 2:938.
2. le Huray and Day, Music and Aesthetics, 344. Hegel, Aesthetics: Lectures on
Fine Arts, 2:902.
3. Ferdinand Hand, Aesthetics of Musical Art, Or, The Beautiful in Music, 2d ed.,

trans. WalterE. Lawson (London, 1880;orig. 1837), 24, 105. C. R. Hennig

speaks similarly in Die Aesthetik der Tonkunst (Leipzig, 1896), 55, 57, 59, 87.
4. Oliver Strunk, ed., Source Readings in Music History (New York, 1950), 776-

77, 779; from Hoffmann'sanalyticalessay (1813) on Beethoven'sFifth Symzur
phony(E. T. A. Hoffmann,Schriften Musik,Nachlese[Munich,1963],3436.
5. "[Music's]
sole subjectis the infinite,"Hoffmanndeclared,and affirmedthat
"music. . . has nothingin commonwiththe externalsensualworld,"including
"definite
feelings"(Strunk,775-76). As CarlDahlhaushas pointedout, literal
readingsof what are intended as metaphorical
descriptions-Romantics'attempts to express verbally that which is by its very nature inexpressibleRomanticaesthetics.Hence, "nothingwould be more mistaken
misinterpret
thanto assertthatan exegete like Tieckor E. T. A. Hoffmann
meanthis poetic
sketchto be the 'hiddenmeaning'of the music, to be the 'text' the tones encode" (Dahlhaus,Die Idee der absolutenMusik[Kassell-Basel,
1978],72 [my
translation]).One of the most "tenaciousprejudicesof intellectualhistory,"
Dahlhaus
is
withthe aesthetics
laments,is thatRomanticaesthetics confounded
of emotion(referential
to
expressionism).
According Dahlhaus,Romanticaestheticsis as far removedfromemotive aestheticsas it is fromHanslickian
formalistaesthetics(Ibid., 74). Peter Schnausexplainsthe historicalcontextand
emotiveand pictorialcharacterizations Beethoven's
of
meaningof Hoffmann's
music in E. T. A. Hoffmann als Beethoven-Rezensent der Allgemeinen

Musikalischen
Schriften Musikwissenschaft, H. H.
zur
ed.
Zeitung,Freiburger
vol.
and
also
Eggebrecht, 8 (Munich Salzburg,
1977),63-71. Schnaus highlights
the structural-analytical
content of Hoffmann's
reviewof the Fifth Symphony
(Ibid., 48-55, 89-95).
6. Eduard Hanslick, The Beautiful in Music: A Contribution to the Revisal of Mu-

sical Aesthetics,
trans.GustavCohen (New York and London, 1891;rpt. New
York, 1974), 124, 125, 126; idem, On the Musically Beautiful: A Contribution
towards the Revision of the Aesthetics of Music, trans., ed. Geoffrey Payzant

Beau1986),58, 59. At the end of chapter1 of On theMusically
(Indianapolis,
Hand in a long list of authorswho stress "feeltiful, Hanslickcites Ferdinand
ings"as the contentor purposeof music.PayzantexplainsthatHanslick,in his
and
critiqueof Hand, quotes him fragmentarily so gives the impressionthat
Hand was aesthetically
more expressionistic
than he actuallywas. Subsequent
referencesto Hanslick'streatisewill cite both Cohen'stranslation
(The Beau-

tiful in Music) as well as Payzant's (On the Musically Beautiful).
7. Leonard B. Meyer, Emotion and Meaning in Music (Chicago and London,

1956), 2-3. To be fair to Hoffmann,in light of Dahlhaus's
warningquotedin
note 5, we shouldrememberthat Hoffmann'sanalysisof Beethoven'sFifth is

62

so.
are
largelytechnical,if superficially The metaphorical
descriptions limited
to the general,introductory
of
paragraphs the essay.
8. Hanslick, The Beautiful in Music, 34, 36, 71, 99, 102; On the Musically Beautiful, 9, 10, 30, 45, 46.
9. Hanslick, The Beautiful in Music, 66, 161, 162; On the Musically Beautiful, 28,
77, 78.
10. Meyer, Emotion and Meaning in Music, 35.

11. WernerAbeggdiscusses"Music Feeling"(Musikund Gefiihl)in Hanslick's
and
writings in Musikasthetik und Musikkritik bei Eduard Hanslick, Studien zur

des
vol. 44 (Regensburg,1974), 57-68.
Musikgeschichte 19. Jahrhunderts,
tacklesthe problemin an essayentitled"Hanslick Musicas Product
on
Payzant
of Feeling," Journal of Musicological Research 9 (1989): 133-46. He specifically

takesup Hanslick's
statement,"As the creationof a thinkingandfeelingmind,
a musicalcompositionhas in high degree the capability be itself full of ideto
ality [Geistigkeit] and feeling [Gefiihl]" (Hanslick, The Beautiful in Music, 73;

On the MusicallyBeautiful,31; Payzant,"Hanslick Music,"133). Payzant
on
tries to pin downwhat Hanslick,the ostensibleopponentof all emotiveinterof
pretations music,meansby a composition
beingfull of feeling. He concludes
that, in the quotationjust cited, Hanslickmeantfeeling "inthe sense in which
thought and feeling are complementary aspects ...

of spirit [Geist], not in the

other sense, in which feeling is opposed to intellect"(Payzant,"Hanslick
on
Music,"136).
12. Hanslick, The Beautiful in Music, 101-102, 67; On the Musically Beautiful, 46-

what Hanslickmeansby
47, 29. Payzantprovidesan essay to help understand
"sonorous
formsin motion"(pp. 93-102). The translation havegivenof HansI
lick's familiarstatement("Sonorousforms in motion are the single and sole
contentof music")is my own, based on the wordingin the firsteditionof the
treatise:"T6nendbewegte Formensind einzig und allein Inhalt und Gegenstandder Musik").In subsequenteditions, Hanslickchangedthe wordingto
"DasWesenderMusiksindtonendbewegteFormen."
WernerAbeggdiscusses
the meaning of Hanslick's statement in Musikdsthetik und Musikkritik bei Eduard Hanslick, 47-56.

13. Peter Kivy, who has forcefullyarguedfor an emotive interpretation music
of
based on its structural
properties,concludesin a recent essay that Hanslick's
views deny music, as a purelyaestheticobject, the power to arouse"gardenstate
variety"emotions. Only when a listeneris in an abnormal
psychological
(Hanslick says "pathological")and hence is susceptible to emotional
responses-that is, whenmusicis not beingheardas a purelyaestheticobjectmightone imaginethat the musicembodiesand expressesemotions,when in
fact the listener,not the music,is the sourceof these emotions.Kivyexplores
of
possibleinterpretations Hanslick's"negativethesis"that music cannot express emotions, in "WhatWas HanslickDenying?"Journalof Musicology8
(1990):3-18. He examinesthe questionof purelyaestheticversuspathological
hearingon pp. 12-13.
14. KarlGrunsky,Musikasthetik
(Berlinand Leipzig:G. J. G6schen'sche
Verlagshandlung,1919 [orig. 1907]),22 (my translation).
15. Ibid., 25.
16. ArthurW. Cohn, "Das musikalische
Verstiindnis:
Neue Ziele," Zeitschrift
fur
4
Musikwissenschaft (Dec. 1921): 129-30 (my translation).
63

17. HermannKretzschmar,"Anregungenzur Forderungmusikalischer
Hermeneutik," Jahrbuch der Musikbibliothek Peters 9 (1902): 57, 51 (full article oc-

as
zur
cupiespp. 45-66). A companion
essaywaspublished "NeueAnregungen
musikalischer
Hermeneutik:
Jahrbuch Musikbibder
Satzasthetik,"
Forderung
liothekPeters12 (1905): 75-86. Both essays are reprintedin a volume, published under Kretzschmar's
name, entitled GesammelteSchriftenaus den
Jahrbuchern der Musikbibliothek Peters, vol. 2 (Leipzig, 1911), 168-92, 28093. Edward Lippman translates both in Musical Aesthetics: A Historical Reader,

vol. 3 (Stuyvesant,New York, 1990), 5-30, 31-46. Translations excerpts
of
from Kretzschmar's essay on hermeneutics in Bojan Bujic'sMusicin
first
are
1851-1912(New York, 1988), 114-20 ("Anregungen,"
47EuropeanThought

53); and in Carl Dahlhaus's and Ruth Katz's Contemplating Music: Source
Readings in the Aesthetics of Music, vol. 2, Aesthetics in Music, no. 5 (Stuyve-

sant, New York, 1989), 619-29 ("Anregungen,"
47-48, 50-54, 56-57, 62-63,
66). Quotationsin Englishfrom these two essays are my translations.
18. Kretzschmar,
51.
"Anregungen," Werner Braun examines the premises of
Kretzschmar's
musicalhermeneutics "Kretzschmars
in
in
Hermeneutik," Beitrage zur musikalischen Hermeneutik, ed. Carl Dahlhaus, Studien zur Musikg-

eschichtedes 19. Jahrhunderts, 43 (Regensburg,1975), 33-39.
vol.
19. Hermann Kretzschmar,"Neue Anregungen,"77, 84. Kretzschmarscorns
purelyformalistic
analysis,exemplified thatof Carlvan Bruyck(Technische
by
und dsthetische Analysen des wohltemperierten Klaviers, 1867), by calling it a

with scientific
"juggling
soundingschoolroom
conceptsand phrases("Schulbeand accusessuch analysisof "distracting
from the
griffenund Redensarten"),
essence of thingswith formalhocus-pocus"
(84-85).
20. In "NeueAnregungen," Kretzschmar the wordVerstandnis quotation
set
in
75,
sense of that word as developed
marks,suggestingthe special philosophical
duringthe nineteenthcentury.
21. Kretzschmar's
of
76-80. A similar
analysis the fugueis in "NeueAnregungen,"
of
presentation this analysis,alongwith the one by Halm of Beethoven'sOp.
53, appearsin my article "The 'New Education'and Music Theory, 19001925," Music Theory and the Exploration of the Past (Chicago: University of

Chicago Press, forthcoming).There, the context is the educationalreform
movementof the early twentiethcentury, while the context here is hermeneuticsand phenomenology.
22. Someexamples,amongmany,of fuguesubjectsthatbeginwithstrongi-5 outlines are WTCI, numbers 16, 17, 22, and WTCII, numbers1, 7, 11, and 12.
8,
23. Kretzschmar's
pedagogicalmotivation becomes explicit when he identifies
hermeneutic
as
in
training the properfocus of "preparatory
training musicaesthetics[Vorschule Musikasthetik]"
der
56,
("Anregungen," 65, 66), and points
to the lamentablestate of publicmusiceducation("Neue Anregungen,"
76).
He addressedthe problemsof musiceducation,tracedtheir origins,and sugentitledMusikalische
gestedremediesin a pamphlet
Zeitfragen
(Leipzig,1903).

24. Dilthey, Einleitung in die Geisteswissenschaften (1883), Gesammelte Schriften,

4th ed., vol. 1 (Stuttgart,1959),5; trans.MichaelNevillein Introduction the
to
Human Sciences, Wilhelm Dilthey: Selected Works, vol. 1, ed. Rudolf A. Mak-

kreel and FrithjofRodi (Princeton,1989),56-57. Dilthey, Der Aufbauderge-

schichtlichen Welt in den Geisteswissenschaften (1910), Gesammelte Schriften,

vol 7. ed. B. Groethuysen
as
(Stuttgart,1927), 148. MakkreelrendersWirken

64

"efficacy" (Dilthey: Philosopher of the Human Studies [Princeton, 1975], 306),

to
whichseems too inert for the noun Wirken.I have changed"efficacy" "acbetweenthe naturaland
tivity."Roy J. HowarddiscussesDilthey'sdistinction
human sciences in Three Faces of Hermeneutics: An Introduction to Current

Theories Understanding Angeles, 1982), 15-16. Thereare severalgood
(Los
of
to
introductions Dilthey'swork. A basic, if older, sourceis
English-language
Herbert A. Hodges, The Philosophy of Wilhelm Dilthey (London, 1952; rpt.

Westport,Conn., 1971). The standard,newer works are Makkreel,Dilthey:
Philosopher of the Human Studies; and Hans Peter Rickman, Wilhelm Dilthey:

Pioneerof theHumanStudies,Stanford,1979).WilliamOuthwaite
givesa brief
to
Social Life: The
introduction Dilthey'sideas in chapter3 of Understanding
Method Called "Verstehen" (London, 1975). The most recent study is Rickman's Dilthey Today: A Critical Appraisal of the Contemporary Relevance of

in
His Work,Contributions Philosophy,vol. 35 (Westport,Conn., 1988).
25. Dilthey, Gesammelte
7:118. Dilthey adoptsthe Hegelianterm "obSchriften,
and
Geist)to denotethe externalization-inliterature
jectivespirit"(objektiver
art, for example-of the humanspirit(Dilthey, Gesammelte
7:208;
Schriften,
Makkreel, Dilthey, Philosopher of the Human Studies, 306-08). On the impos-

naturaland humansciencesbased solely on their obsibilityof distinguishing
jects of study, see Makkreel,Ibid., 222, and Dilthey, Gesammelte
Schriften,
5:248: "The difference between the Naturwissenschaften and the Geisteswissen-

two
A
schaftenis not groundedin differentiating classesof objects[Objekten].
distinction naturalobjectsand spiritual
of
objectsdoes not exist."Diltheysays
this because, in additionto intangiblessuch as ideas and events, the human
studiesare also concernedwith culturalmeaningsof physicalobjects, such as
paintingsand buildings.
26. "Nature explain,"Dilthey says, "mentallife [Seelenleben] understand."
we
we
und
GeDilthey, "Ideenubereine beschreibende zergliedernde
Psychologie,"
sammelte
vol.
Schriften, 5, 2d ed. (Stuttgart,1957), 144;translated Richard
by
M. Zaneras "IdeasConcerning Descriptive AnalyticPsychology
a
and
(1894),"
in Descriptive Psychology and Historical Understanding (The Hague, 1977), 27.

27. Hans Peter Rickmanexamines the meaningof 'understanding' Dilthey's
in
writings in Understanding and the Human Studies (London, 1967). William

Outhwaite
summarizes distinction
the
between'understanding' 'explaining'
and
in Understanding
Social Life, 11-23. One of the best knowncritiquesof 'unis
derstanding' TheodoreAbel's essay "The OperationCalledVerstehen,"in
ThePhilosophyof Science,eds. HerbertFeigl and MayBrodbeck(New York,
1953),677-87; firstpublishedin Journalof Sociology54 [1948]).RudolfMakkreeldismissesAbel'scriticisms beingbasedon a misinterpretation Dilthas
of
ey's notion of 'understanding' (Makkreel, Dilthey: Philosopher of the Human
Studies, 253n).

28. Wilhelm Dilthey, "Das Erleben und die Selbstbiographie,"Gesammelte
vol. 7, 2d ed. (Stuttgart: G. Teubner, 1958), 191. Dilthey, "Das
B.
Schriften,
Verstehen anderer Personen und ihrer LebensauBerungen,"
Gesammelte
vol.
Schriften, 7, 2d ed. (Stuttgart,1958), 214; trans.by KennethL. Heiges as
"TheUnderstanding OtherPersonsand TheirExpressions Life," in Deof
of
scriptive Psychology and Historical Understanding, 132.
29. Dilthey, Gesammelte Schriften, 7:146. See Makkreel, Dilthey: Philosopher of
the Human Studies, 308.

65

30. Dilthey, Einleitung in die Geisteswissenschaften, xviii; Introduction to the
Human Sciences, 50. In the translation, Makkreel and Rodi provide an excellent introduction to Dilthey's Einleitung (pp. 3-43). Dilthey enumerates and
characterizes the three modes of consciousness-thinking,
feeling, and
willing-in "Ideas Concerning a Descriptive and Analytic Psychology," chapter
7 ("The Structure of Psychic Life"), 82-84 ("Ideen," Gesammelte Schriften,
5:201-02).
31. Dilthey, "Das Verstehen anderer Personen," 214; "The Understanding of
Other Persons," 133.
32. Dilthey, "Das Verstehen anderer Personen," 217; "The Understanding of
Other Persons," 136. Friedrich Schleiermacher, Hermeneutik, 2d ed., rev. and
enl., ed. Heinz Kimmerle, Abhandlungen der Heidelberger Akademie der
Wissenschaften, vol. 2 (Heidelberg, 1974 [orig. 1805-33]), 83; Hermeneutics:
The Handwritten Manuscripts, ed. Heinz Kimmerle, trans. James Duke and
Jack Forstman (Missoula, Montana, 1977), 112. On the psychologically-based
"divinatory" method of interpretation, Schleiermacher says, "By leading the
interpreter to transform himself, so to speak, into the author, the divinatory
method seeks to gain an immediate comprehension of the author as an individual" (Hermeneutik, 105; Hermeneutics, 150; see also The Hermeneutics
Reader, ed. Kurt Mueller-Vollmer [New York, 1985], 96). See also Rudolf A.
Makkreel, Dilthey: Philosopher of the Human Studies, 329. Schleiermacher's
idea of coming to know an author better than he knew himself may stem from
August and Friedrich Schlegel, who expressed a similar view in their Athanaeum, vol. 1, part 2 (Berlin, 1798, 123; rpt. Stuttgart, 1960, 299), where they
explain "In order to understand someone who only half understands himself,
one must first understand him completely and better than he does himself, but
then must also understand [him] only half and just as good as he does himself."
33. Kretzschmar, "Neue Anregungen," 75.
34. Kretzschmar, "Anregungen," 50-51.
35. Dilthey, "Die Einbildungskraft des Dichters: Bausteine fir eine Poetik," Gesammelte Schriften, vol. 6 (Stuttgart, B. G. Teubner, 1924; 3d ed., 1958), 148;
trans. Louis Agosta and Rudolf A. Makkreel as "The Imagination of the Poet:
Elements for a Poetics," in Poetry and Experience, Wilhelm Dilthey, Selected
Works, vol. 5 (Princeton, 1985), 77. As with the translation of Dilthey's Einleitung (see notes 24 and 30 above), the translations in Poetry and Experience
are preceded by an excellent introductory essay (pp. 3-26).
36. Dilthey, "Die Einbildungskraft des Dichters," 194; "The Imagination of the
Poet," 124.
37. Dilthey, "Die Drei Epochen der modernen Asthetik und ihre heutige Aufgabe," Gesammelte Schriften, 6:275; trans. Michael Neville as "The Three Epochs of Modern Aesthetics and its Present Task," Poetry and Experience, 210.
The historian Johann Gustav Droysen (1808-1884), important for his ideas on
the relationship between 'understanding' and history, expresses a similar
thought in Grundriss der Historik (Leipzig, 1867; 2nd ed. 1875), 9, ? 9; Outline
of the Principles of History, trans. E. Benjamin Andrews (New York, [orig.
1893]), 12-13: "The possibility of...
understanding ... depends on the fact
that humankind's sensuous and spiritual nature expresses every inner process in
forms apprehensible by the senses, [and] reflects inner processes in every ex-

66

pression.On being perceived,the utterance,by projectingitself into the interior of the perceiver, evokes the same inner process" (translationslightly
adapted).WilliamOuthwaitediscussesDroysen'sideas and their significance
for Dilthey in Understanding Social Life: The Method Called "Verstehen"(Lon-

don, 1975), 21-23.
38. Dilthey, Der Aufbau der geschichtlichen Welt in den Geisteswissenschaften, Gesammelte Schriften, 7:85. See Rudolf A. Makkreel, Dilthey: Philosopher of the

Human Studies(Princeton,1975), 295. FrithjofRodi traces the evolutionof
in
within the
Dilthey's idea of "structure" "Dilthey'sConcept of 'Structure'
Scienceand Philosophy," Diltheyand Phein
Contextof Nineteenth-Century
Continental
nomenology,ed. RudolfA. Makkreeland John Scanlon,Current
D.C., 1987), 107-19.
Research,vol. 6 (Washington,
39. Dilthey, Der Aufbau der geschichtlichen Welt, 169. Makkreel translates
Wirkungszusammenhang as "dynamic system" in Dilthey: Philosopher of the

HumanStudies,314. Another Dilthey scholar,Hans Peter Rickman,renders
Wirkungszusammenhang as "system of interactions," in Wilhelm Dilthey: Se-

ed.
lectedWritings, H. P. Rickman(Londonand New York, 1976), 30.
wroteme (15 June 1990)thatvolume
RudolfMakkreel
40. In our correspondence,
Works(projected 1992)will include
for
4 of the seriesWilhelm
Dilthey:Selected
on
a translation of the philosopher's 1860 "Preisschrift," hermeneutics
der
and the Rise of HistoricalConsciousness"
["Verhaltnis
("Hermeneutics
zur
HermeneutikSchleiermachers Geschichteder Auslegungin Philosophie
und Theologie"]).
41. Kretzschmar,
"Neue Anregungen",
80.
42. Dilthey, "Die Entstehungder Hermeneutik,"Gesammelte
Schriften,5:319,
of
"TheRise
320. There are two translations Dilthey'sessay on hermeneutics:
trans. FredericJameson, New LiteraryHistory3 (1972):
of Hermeneutics,"
trans. Hans Peter Rickman,
233; and "The Developmentof Hermeneutics,"
Wilhelm Dilthey: Selected Writings, 249.

43. Dilthey, "Entstehung,"
330.
44. Kretzschmar,
64.
to
"Anregungen," Also, p. 49: "According the laws of addition ...

an entire composition can be explained as well."

45. Dilthey added these comments to the essay "Das Verstehen anderer Personen," in a section entitled "Das musikalischeVerstehen," Gesammelte
7:221;"Musical
Schriften,
Understanding,"
appendedto "TheUnderstanding
of Other Persons," Descriptive Psychology and Historical Understanding, 139.

46. Dilthey, "Das musikalische
140.
Verstehen,"222; "Musical
Understanding,"
47. Adolf Nowak discussesthe relationship
and
between Kretzschmar's Dilthey's
ideas in "Diltheyund die musikalische
zur
Hermeneutik,"
Beitrage musikalischen Hermeneutik, 11-32.

48. Dilthey, "Das musikalische
139.
Verstehen,"221; "Musical
Understanding,
49. AugustHalm, Von zwei Kulturen Musik,3d ed. (Stuttgart,1947), 31 (my
der
translation).Von zwei Kulturenwas originallypublishedin 1913 by Georg
Miiller(Munich).
50. Halm, "Humor und Musik," Von Grenzen und Landern der Musik (Munich,

11
1916), 111-12; "UnsereZeit und Beethoven,"Die Rheinlande (1911):60,
rpt. in Von Formund Sinnder Musik,ed. SiegfriedSchmalzriedt
(Wiesbaden,
1978), 153 (my translations).
67

51. Halm, "Musikalische Bildung," in WickersdorferJahrbuch II (1909/10) (Jena,
1911), 63, rpt. in Von Form und Sinn, 220. Von zwei Kulturen, 50 (my translations).
52. Halm, Einfuhrung in die Musik (Berlin, 1926; rpt. Darmstadt, 1966), 139 (my
translation).
53. Halm's analysis of the "Waldstein" was first published in the essay "Musikalische Bildung," 50-53, in Von Form und Sinn, 212-14. Halm expanded on the
analysis in Von zwei Kulturen, 107-10.
54. The analytical points in this paragraph are my own, made in the spirit of Halm's
analysis. After commenting on measures 1-20, he discusses the recapitulation
up to measure 174.
55. Hanslick, The Beautiful in Music, 82; On the Musically Beautiful, 36. Dilthey
agrees with Hanslick and Halm on the error of program music: "Program music
is the death of true instrumental music" ("Das musikalische Verstehen," 224;
"Musical Understanding," 142).
56. Dilthey discussed "grammatical" and "psychological" (also called "technical")
interpretation in the aforementioned 1900 essay "Die Entstehung der Hermeneutik," 331 (Jameson trans., 244; Rickman trans., 259). Dilthey adopted the
notions of grammatical and psychological interpretation from Schleiermacher,
who discussed them in variously dated manuscripts (1805, 1809-10, 1819):
Hermeneutik, 86-103 (grammatical), 147-51, 113-20 (technical, psychological); Hermeneutics, 117-47 (grammatical), 147-51, 161-73 (technical, psychological). Already in the aphorisms of 1805/1809-10, Schleiermacher
distinguished between the two types of interpretation by saying, "Strictly speaking, grammatical interpretation is the objective side, technical, the subjective
(Hermeneutik, 31; Hermeneutics, 42). He contrasted "grammatical"with "technical" to stress the art and special talent required for the latter kind of interpretation.
57. In a letter dated August 19, 1922, Halm told Schenker that he did not share the
latter's enthusiasm for the Urlinie, as revealed in an analysis of Schubert's song
"Ihr Bild" (Tonwille 1 [1921]: 46-49). Hellmut Federhofer mentions Halm's
letter in Heinrich Schenker, nach Tagebuchern und Briefen in der Oswald Jonas
Memorial Collection, University of California, Riverside, Studien zur Musikwissenschaft, vol. 3 (Hildesheim and New York, 1985), 145. In another letter
(Nov. 6-10, 1923), defending Bruckner, Halm declared "In the case that
Bruckner does not possess the Urlinie, I would still leave open the question
whether that is a fault, i.e., a deficiency in his music, or whether it is the necessary corollary of his compositional procedures-to which I hold now as before" (my translation). Several years later, in Einfuhrung in die Musik, 75,
Halm reiterated his defense of Bruckner: "If Schenker evaluates the music of
Anton Bruckner lower because it lacks the Urlinie and synthesis, I counter that,
if it were correct that Bruckner does not have an Urlinie (I do not know), then
for me it would prove its dispensability, and with no less certainty than that with
which I conclude from Schenker's studies that non-Geniuses also have the Urlinie" (my translation).

68

