Yale University Department of Music

The Problem of Tonality in Pre-Baroque and Primitive Music
Author(s): William Thomson
Source: Journal of Music Theory, Vol. 2, No. 1 (Apr., 1958), pp. 36-46
Published by: Duke University Press on behalf of the Yale University Department of Music
Stable URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/842929
Accessed: 14/12/2009 15:20
Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of JSTOR's Terms and Conditions of Use, available at
http://www.jstor.org/page/info/about/policies/terms.jsp. JSTOR's Terms and Conditions of Use provides, in part, that unless
you have obtained prior permission, you may not download an entire issue of a journal or multiple copies of articles, and you
may use content in the JSTOR archive only for your personal, non-commercial use.
Please contact the publisher regarding any further use of this work. Publisher contact information may be obtained at
http://www.jstor.org/action/showPublisher?publisherCode=duke.
Each copy of any part of a JSTOR transmission must contain the same copyright notice that appears on the screen or printed
page of such transmission.
JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide range of
content in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and facilitate new forms
of scholarship. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.

Duke University Press and Yale University Department of Music are collaborating with JSTOR to digitize,
preserve and extend access to Journal of Music Theory.

http://www.jstor.org

THE

PROBLEM

OF
AND

IN

TONALITY
PRIMITIVE

PRE-BAROQUE

MUSIC

by
William Thomson
Sul Ross State College
Within the first half of our century, the term "tonality" has become imprecise to the point of acting more as an emotional stimulus
than an accurate description of musical events. In one case it functions
as a vague expression for musical coherence; in another context it imor pedantry. Once such a useful term beplies non-progressiveness
comes established in a professional vocabulary, each person who utters
it tucks his own set of meanings behind it without systematically
considering the implications which follow fromhis personal interpretation.
I do not propose that this be considered a particularly dangerous linguistic vice. It is the normal evolution of any word so pressed into the
front-center of musical polemics during our experimental half-century.
However, it seems reasonable to wish for a more precise understanding of any word so firmly imbedded within our understanding of music.
In at least one way, I believe that this loose understanding of tonality
has led to a perversion of historical fact. It is this problem which I
I refer to the widespread
hope to reveal here and, ideally, to resolve.
only of polyphonic
opinion that tonality is a phenomenon characteristic
music or, as is sometimes urged, only of music that appeared concur"
rently with what we often call "the harmonic consciousness.
have been particularly
Two schools of musicians
outspoken in
their insistence that tonality is not a universal quality. A number of
of
twelve-tone
have denied the psychological
composers
necessity
tonality, claiming that the relating of tonal events to a central tone (or
chord) was a stylistic peculiarity of the period extending, roughly, from
1600 through some works of our present day. Similarly, a number of
of
have denied the universality
important historical
musicologists
tonality in claiming that modality and tonality are mutually exclusive
The historical musicologist's
terms.
arguments have in turn enjoyed
who have
occasional support from a few anthropological
musicologists
The
concluded that tonality is not present in primitive man's songs.
attitudes which stem from these two points of view are significant, for
an understanding of our musical scene turns, to a great extent, upon
our understanding of the music of our past and the general role played
by tonality in that music.
A clear example of a somewhat narrow view of what is meant by
the term "tonality" is revealed in a statement made by Stravinsky.
We thus no longer find ourselves in
the framework of classic tonality in the
scholastic

sense

of the word.

36

.

.Having

reached this point, it is no less indispensable to obey, not new idols, but the
eternal necessity of affirming the axis of
our music and to recognize the existence
of certain poles of attraction.
Diatonic
tonality is only one means of orienting
music toward these poles.
The function
of tonality is completely subordinated to
the force of attraction of the pole of sonority. All music is nothing more than a
succession
of impulses
that converge
toward a definite point of repose.
That
is as true of Gregorian chant as it is of a
Bach fugue, as true of Brahms' music as
it is of Debussy's.
The general law of attraction is satisfied in only a limited way
for
by the traditional diatonic system,
that systempossesses
no absolute value.1
It is difficult to understand why tonality cannot mean what Stravinsky here prefers to call "pole of attraction, point of repose. " The
term evidently means for him only a system of tonal relations which
result fromthe diatonic systems of major and minor orthe generalbass
practice of the early eighteenth century. Since poles of attraction and
points of repose can be found in the music of any era, any culture, it
seems unnecessarily
delimiting to demand such a narrow understanding
of what tonality is and means in the musical experience.
But there are other examples of this narrow interpretation.
Manfred Bukofzer, for example, presents the adoption of tonality as one of
the most salient features of the musical change from medieval and
renaissance
With Bukofzer, tonality
styles to that of the Baroque.
seems to be a limited harmonic principle by which chords are related
in progressions
derived from the diatonic scale system.
Tonality may be defined as a system
of chordal relations based on the attraction of a tonal center. This tonic formed
the center of gravitation for the other
chords. It is no mere metaphor if tonality
is explained in terms of gravitation. Both
tonality and gravitation were discoveries
of the baroque period made at exactly the
same time.y
We could interpret this statement as the recognition of man's
awakened consciousness
of tonality during the Baroque.
Bukofzer certainly did not mean to imply that gravity did not exist before its laws
were unraveled.
Perhaps he meant that tonality, then, merely gained
recognition as a structural force at this time. But this interpretation
1.
2.

I. Stravinsky,
M. Bukofzer,

The Poetics of Music (1947), pp. 35-36.
Music in the Baroque Era (1947), p. 12.
37

is closed to us when later we are told that
[Tonality] emerged at approximately
the same time in the Neapolitan opera and
in the instrumental music of the Bologna
school and was codified by Rameau more
than a generation after its first appearance

in music

. . . The technical

means

of achieving key-feeling were, aside from
the cadence itself, diatonic sequences of
chords that gravitated toward the tonal
center. 3
Implicit within such a concept of tonality
tonality and modality are necessarily
separate,
dering forces.
Modality is a melodic principle;
bound up within a system of chords.
In support
find also that in renaissance music
The progressions
bination

to any other

is the assumption that
mutually exclusive ortonality is inextricably
of this assumption we

from any one com. . . were

dictated

not by a tonal or harmonic principle, but
by the melodic laws of part-writing . . .
The intervallic
harmony of renaissance
music was directed by modality,
the
chordal harmony of the late baroque by
tonality. 4
It would seem that Willi Apel concurs with this view.
In Gregorian chant and similar bodies
of monophonic music the relationships
are of a purely melodic character . .
whereas a much more complex situation
is encountered in the field of harmonized
music. 5
But what are the "laws" or "relationships" that are "purely melodic"? And what is the "attraction, " as Bukofzer calls it, exerted by
a tonic? In other words, within a series of chords, what causes one
chord to dominate its associates and, thereby, become a center of aural
focus? Could the laws which control the monophonic situation likely
be the same which control the signification of a tonic in a chordal texture ?
One aspect of Rameau's theory of the naturalbass was the recognition that certain intervallic (melodic) relations formed between chord
roots create pleasant and decisive harmonic progress.
In other words,
even in the historical period singled out by Bukofzer, tonality is not
3.
4.
5.

Ibid., pp. 219-220.
Ibid., p. 12.
Harvard Dictionary

of Music (1944),
38

"Tonality."

Rather, it is a
recognized as a product only of a "chordal" principle.
"melodic" pattern created by chord roots that reinforces
a particular
tonal point and its accompanying triad.
It seems clear that tonality
could be present then without triads, for the chordal roots alone could
establish a pattern conducive to a tonic effect.
Another concept of tonality similar in many respects tothe above,
can be found in the writings of Schoenberg.
He believed that the music
we call "modal" does not possess the attribute of tonality. He said that
"on the contrary, we must concede that the church modes do not at all
conform to the law of tonality. "6 It was on this basis that he developed
a triangular historical perspective
that admitted of a rise, a period of
floration, and a subsequent period of decline and abandonment for tonality. And Ernst Krenek joins Schoenberg in his belief that tonality
was a late-comer
to the music of the Western world, though his date
does not agree with Bukofzer's.
Tonality
during

the late

arose

into the foreground

medieval

period

. . .

To

us, tonality undoubtedly means that it is
possible to establish a system of relationbetween the
ships and interdependencies
harmonies that inhabit the area of a sound
language. Tonality is in this sense a harmonic principle and therefore has no legitimate place in the development of music as we have considered it so far. [He
refers to a previous discussion of medieval monody.
Krenek's statement gives rise tothe same problem we encountered before; we are not told how chords create tonics.
And there are at
least two other points which beg for clarification.
We know, for instance, that musicaficta practices inthe church frequently transformed
modal chant into something quite removed from modal theory, often
We also know that the Greek modal
simple major-minor
systems.
system was overhauled (with devastating results) and applied to chant
after this body of melody was collected
and codified.
considerably
These two considerations
kindle a certain skepticism in
necessarily
regard to any thoroughgoing relation we might try to establish between
modal theory and modal practice.
A comment made by George Herzog seems applicable here: "In
the study of folk music there has been perhaps a little too much preoccupation with scales and intervals, which are merely the raw materials
of melody, at the expense of tonalityI'8 The origins of chant certainly
do not exlude it from this opinion. The entire theoretical,
as well as
6. In "Problems of Harmony, " Schoenberg(1937),
ed. M. Armipp. 2 65-306.
7. E. Krenek, Music Here and Now(1939), pp. 108,109.
8. Standard Dictionary of Folklore, M thology and Legend(1950),
"Song: folk song and the music of folk song.

tage,

39

basis for music-making in the Western world has been
common-sense,
upon the assumption that structural relationships do exist begrounded
tween pitches, unadorned by harmonic, i. e. chordal, support. It even
smacks of contradiction to speak of pitches in a melody without the
arprior assumption that those pitches, in the listening experience,
into patterns which support tones of dominance as
range themselves
points of aural attention or focus. But Krenek, and we may assume
Bukofzer and Apel as well, would not accept an analysis of chant based
on tonality. He believes that to examine plain-song in terms of tonality
is a "vain enterprise. " He elaborates by saying that
Doubtless, repetition of the pattern
involved in the iteration principle, would
show the predominance
of certain tones
in the melodic line over others; but this
would not necessarily
give them the character of fundamental tones carrying certain chords, for the reason that no chords
were as yet involved.
To my mind, it is
not the fact that a particular tone happens
to be the first in a scale which makes it
the basic tone of that scale; for that matter, it might as well have been the fifth
or the last tone. A tone becomes the tonic
only when the central triad is built over
it. 9
Perhaps Krenek is unaware that he has switched his gaze from GreBut music is not made from scales; rather,
gorian chant to a scale.
scales are, as Hindemith has aptly put it, the "sterilized derivative of
melody. "10
Krenek is right in maintaining that the initial tone of a scale possesses no metaphysical
quality whereby it is rendered fundamental to
its gamut. That is why the scale, abstracted as it is from the real musical substance,
is valueless for the determination of a structurally
fundamental tone. The tonality of a piece of music is not discovered
by an analysis of a pitch series that has been culled from it. Only relations in musical contexts can determine the signification of one tone
as a tonic.
But the most questionable facet of Krenek's denial of tonality in
melody has not yet been touched. We again are not told how a "central
triad" in a chordal texture becomes "central. " Inherent in this oversight lies the primary fault of many who admit tonality only to the domain of "post-chordal" music. Krenek cannot hold that a tone becomes
a tonality center only because of the presence of a triad above it, for
this would be tantamount to saying that every root of every triad within
a texture is a tonic. Though in a certain sense this is logically undeni9. Krenek, op. cit., p. 110.
10. P. Hindemith, "Methods of Music Theory' The Musical Quarterly, 30:25.
40

able, experience
dominant.

still forces

us to regard

one of these

triads as pre-

To recognize harmonic implications
or tonality in primitive music is generally frowned upon by musicologists
most acquainted with
studies of primitive man's songs. Hornbostel expressed his disbelief
that pure melody was related to melody born of a 'harmonic" environment such as ours in the following:
Pure

melody

-

unlike

ours

-

is not

conceived harmonically; and so long as we
cannot divest ourselves of the idea - so
natural to our way of thinking - that it is
based on harmony and interpret it in this
sense, we arbitrarily change its meaning
and cannot arrive at a proper understanding of it. 11
In one respect Hornbostel's statement is justified, but in another
it is misleading.
The difficulty revolves about what is here meant by
the term "harmony'' If he understands by that term the traditional conhis dictum is compelling.
On the other
cept of harmonic relations,
hand, if he means to deny that certain peculiarities
of tone relations
tend to establish a framework of harmonic reference - in the sense of
to one tone - then he
establishing a pattern of primary relationships
denies the very basic quality of melodic perception.
But I believe that Hornbostel was merely
softening of his view in the following:

cautious,

for we find a

On the other hand, pure melody does
contain elements related probably to those
which, in our music, have contributed to
form harmony.
As the compass of the
melody, in most cases, is small, fourths
and fifths are more important and more
But even then they
frequent than octaves.
are too wide to be used in melodic sequence.

. . They are rather

used

as con-

structive elements
determining the distance between predominant
the
notes,
compass of melodic phrases, and the rise
or fall of a melody when its position is
In this way they
changed (transposed).
mark out the field where melody is at
that pure
play. We can say, therefore,
melody, too, has "tonality," its tonality
being established by the functions and the
mutual relations of the notes. 12
11.
12.

E. M. Hornbostel,
Ibid., pp. 35-36.

"African Negro Music, " Africa,
41

I:30.

The frameworkfunction
performedby certain intervals, especialmajor thirds, apparently exerts
ly by fifths and fourths, sometimes
some effect upon the extreme pitch ranges of a melody.
This has been
revealed inthe music of at least one culture by Herzog. In generalizing
about the character of Yuman songs, he says
The tonal range of most songs falls
within the interval of the fifth and the
tenth. As a rule, one of the tones can be
established as "tonic" on the ground that
it carries the most melodic weight . .
The tonic is often the lowest tone of the
melody, usually alsothe final tone. Tones
next in melodic importance can be found
at various points.
In general, they appear above the tonic, seldom below. 1
These structural facts about certain species of primitive music
indicate a kind of deployed harmonic field created by melody similar to
that discussed by Hindemith in Book I of his Craft of Musical Composition. The use of intervals such as fourths and fifths (the range of the
particular song permitting) as structural points of emphasis
implies
an harmonic relation essentially
no different from that to be found in
any theme by Mozart or Haydn.
This "harmonic field" is no recent discovery,
early as the turn of the century George Santayana
acute musical theorist) stated that

of course,
(certainly

for as
not an

What a rich note is to a pure and thin
one, that a chord is to a note; nor is
for
melody wholly different in principle,
it is a chord rendered piecemeal.
Time
and the harmony is deployed;
intervenes,
so that in melody rhythm is added, with
its immense appeal, to the cumulative effect secured by rendering many notes together. 14
It seems that a real basis for denying tonality - even a harmonic
structure -for pre-baroque monody or polyphony is elusive. Melodies,
no matter how naive or "unharmonic" cannot represent pure states of
motion.
The human perceptual mechanism exhibits a
pitch-to-pitch
tendency - even a necessity -to group tones into patterns whose parts
possess a simultaneous or contiguous existence.
There are powerful objections to the belief that Gregorian chant,
or any other monodic music of man's history does not, or did not, during the time of that music's inception, incorporate tonality as a struc13.
Folklore,
14.

G. Herzog, "The Yuman Musical Style, " Journal of American
41:192.
G. Santayana, Reason in Art_(1906), p. 49.
42

A precise
and thorough analysis
of the causes of tonality
tural feature.
in the music of the late baroque
and classical
would reveal
periods
features
which are just as solidly
not as obpresent
(though perhaps
primitive
viously so) in monody,
song, or renaissance
polyphony.
a fundamental
situation
of perpresents
experience
Any musical
no different
A cognitive
takes place which is basically
process
ception.
or recogThe creation
from any other of man's experiential
processes.
nition of a hierarchy
of musical
relations
within which musical
tones
is a result of the
are cognitively
transformed
into organized
patterns
in human experience.
need for simplicity
In regard to the necessity
of
the words of the late Andrew Ushenko are relevant.
such an attitude,
is unavoidCognitive transformation
able because
and obstructing
superfluous
tendencies
are always left out of account;
but the resultant
picture brings out a consistent
character
of the original the more
15
clearly.
And Wolfgang Koehler
has made clear the psychological
basis for what
we might call the "tonal patterning"
that leads to a tonality experience.
If all the content of
were indifferent
grains
it would be a hard task
in and to react to
selves

the sensory
field
of sensory
stuff,
to orientate
oursuch a world. 16

the musical
result
of this cognitive
transrepresents
Tonality
As listeners,
formation.
we do not soak in musical tones as though we
were indifferent
each tone particle
related equally and balanced
sponges,
with all others.
Just as in visual perception,
a hierarchy
we create
of
elements
from physically
undifferentiated
matter.
This is not to say that the role of the composer
is not considerable in such a scheme
of things,
whether
he be a twentieth-century
American
or an aboriginal
On the contrary,
Indian.
the composer's
is to arrange
musical
tones according
to
function,
crudely
speaking,
basic laws of perception
which make the tonality
process
interesting,
as well as possible.
If this were not true, the composer
would assume
the legitimate
role of chef de systeme,
his sole problem
that of trackschemes
for arranging
notational
on
ing down ever-different
patterns
the lined page.
In spite of our experimental
I cannot believe
century,
that future knowledge
of human psychology
or the history
of musical
style will support such a view.
A number
of responsible
have expressed
the belief that
persons
music is constantly
in a state of stylistic
flux - each sociological
mutation giving rise to a corresponding
in musical
alteration
ideals and
Related to this notion is the opinion that there are no unisystems.
15.
16.

A. P. Ushenko,
Power and Events(1946),p.
50.
W. Koehler,
Gestalt Psychology(1947),
p. 177.
43

versal laws operative within the historical record of music.
The conclusion is that tonality and related matters are mere results of socioI cannot fully concur with such an opinion, nor
cultural conditioning.
do I believe that our present knowledge of past eras and man's unWe are commakeup bear out such a view.
changed psychological
pelled to agree with Max Schoen that there are certainly elements within the musical experience that are "not dependent on experience and
training alone. "17
of tonal relations to
Suppose that we consider our experience
those of one man of the past. For this purpose we have the introspective testimony of the octave effect from one who wrote many hundred
years ago.
Why is it that in the octave the concord of the upper note exists in the lower,
but not vice versa? Is it because, speaking generally, the sound of both exists in
both, but if not so it exists in the lower
note; for it is the greater?18
And further:
Why is it thatthe difference of an octave may be undetected and appear to be
in unison as in the Phoenician lyre and in
the human voice. For the sound contained
in the upper note is not in unison, but the
interval of the octave has notes analogous
to each other. 19
Even the current recognition
in the following query:

of "tonal volume" can be found paralleled

Why does the low note contain the
sound of the high note? Is it because the
low note is heavier?
It is like an obtuse
angle, whereas the high note is like an
acute angle. 20
These comments are not just relevant historical curios.
Rather,
they pose a serious threat to any denial of common perceptual modes
throughout the history of our musical culture. It is justified to believe
that if a pseudo-Aristotle
recognized inthe octave muchthe same properties we take for granted today, his conceptualization
of other intervals known to him would not be far from our own.
But tonality does not have to be understood
17.
18.
19.
20.

in a purely "harmonic"

M. Schoen, The Psychology of Music(1940),
Musical Problems I, XIX. 13.
Aristotle(?),
Ibid., XIX.8.
Ibid., XIX. 14.
44

p. 46.

sense, as some theories of tonality imply. 21 The melodic framing action mentioned before, whereby certain intervals act as tonal reference
points, is not the sole determinant for creating reference points within
A great number of primitive songs do not extend
musical textures.
over a range that permits such forces to act. As a matter of fact, some
evidence indicates that the earliest forms of melody made use of only
two tones, usually those tones neighboring each other in the potential
pitch series. 22 There are definite (though flexible) laws which govern
such tonal sequences, but analyses of those here would go far beyond
the scope of this paper. Since my purpose here is only to reveal the
inadequacies of a too narrow understanding of tonality, it seems sufficient to emphasize here that a particular range does not have to be
spanned for a tonic effect to result. In the absence of intervals serving
the "framing" function, such matters as contextual location, rhythmic
as well as such
stress,
duration, repetition and dynamic emphasis,
general factors as rising or falling inflection, enter into the matter of
pitch-focus.
It seems that we are justified in allowing tonality a wider berth
within the history of music.
There is no reason to perpetuate the unnecessary
marriage of tonality and harmony (in its connotation of
chordal texture).
Such a conception has impeded the formation of an
all-embracing
theory of music that would eliminate the superficial but
retain the universal, the necessary.
The conceptualization of tones into patterns more readily "understood" lies as the very foundation for the meaningful, the comprehensible musical
This perceptual transformation,
which
experience.
merely follows the lead given in music by the composer or improviser,
governs any combination of tones, whether they assume melodic or
chordal forms.
It is this "path of least resistance" which the listener
is offered by his very nature that permits him to realize "music" from
disparate sensations of sound. This is true whether these sounds be
formed into what we might call "Gregorian chant" or "progressive
jazz.

"

Perhaps the meaning of tonality has been perverted only because
of its notoriety during the early part of this century. After the dramatic
ramblings of Wagner from one tonal field to another the abandonment of
It most likely aptonality in its diatonic meaning appeared plausible.
and good to a culture that saw in mere change the
peared necessary
ethical trappings of "progress."
I suspect that the simplicity in which tonality is cloaked in the
music of the late baroque, the pre-classic,
and the classic periods
was so overwhelming that music of other, less "direct," eras appeared
to be devoid of this quality. When an object or idea is overbearing in
its effect, we sometimes
are blinded to the presence of like qualities
which reside in related objects or ideas.
The wholesale exploitation of
21. For example, those of Hindemith and Schenker.
22. See Curt Sachs, The Rise of Music in the Ancient World
(1943), p. 32.
45

the major and minor scales,
key as an element of form, and preharmony all combine to magnifythe sense
ponderantly consonanttriadic
of tonality in the music of the period 1700-1850.
And the case of primitive music, perhaps is not more complex.
is an infant science.
like psychology,
There has been
Anthropology,
a tendency to emphasize difference more than similarity in studies of
The result
cultures removed from our Western sphere of influence.
has been unfortunate, for emphasis on stylistic change has hidden eleat the expense of
musical differences
mental qualities,
emphasizing
the basic fabric of the musical experience.

46

