MUSIC HAPTIC : MUSICAL HARMONY NOTIONS FOR ALL WITH A
FORCE FEEDBACK MOUSE AND A SPATIAL REPRESENTATION
Bertrand Tornil
´
Equipe TOBIA
IRIT - Universit´ Paul Sabatier
e
31062 Toulouse Cedex 09
France
ABSTRACT
This paper describes Music Haptic, an application which
enables users (especially blind users) to train of musical harmony notions due to a spatial representation and
a force feedback mouse. This mouse enables the progressive rebuilding of the mental image of a graphical document through knowing the positions of its elements. We
present technical context of our prototype and the possible
alternatives. Then, we describe our prototype and discuss
directions for future research.
1. INTRODUCTION
With their capabilities, computers have often been used
in musical education. Several approach exists in this research ﬁeld : graphical visualization [8] [4], artiﬁcial intelligence [9], computer musical analysis and composition
[2].However, these approaches often forget users with visual disabilities.
In a traditional situation, a blind user or a low vision
user uses a keyboard to interact with a computer. The
computer answers him via a voice synthesis and/or a braille
display. This method is completely adapted to the access
to textual documents. With graphical information, a textual description may be proposed. However, the problem
persists on the one hand because these descriptions are not
always present, and on the other hand because textual descriptions can quickly prove to be long and tiresome to
consult.
Accessibility to the music notation for blind users is
based on linear transcription of musical data into braille
notation [1] [21]. It implies knowledge in musical and
harmonical notions, and the comprehension of the Braille.
The use of force feedback devices was thus studied in
accessibility research [3] [5] [15] [17] [23]. Indeed, these
peripherals authorize a more direct interaction based on
the sensory capacities.
Music Haptic uses a force feedback mouse in order to
present some harmonic informations. First of all, thus,
we present how we use the force feedback modality : we
propose the concept of “relative localization”. Then we
present the Steedman musical representation which enables us to use the relative localization for harmony train-

Nadine Baptiste-Jessel
´
Equipe TOBIA
IRIT - Universit´ Paul Sabatier
e
31062 Toulouse Cedex 09
France
ing. In the next part, we describe the architecture which
we retained for our prototype. Then, we present the features of Music Haptic at its stage of development. Finally we will ﬁnish by presenting the research orientations
which we consider for the future.
2. HAPTIC INTERACTION
2.1. The force feedback mouse
We use the “WingmanTM Force Feedback Mouse” (Figure 1) created by Immersion Corporation [11] and marketed by LogitechTM .
The handling surface of this mouse is small : 1.9cm
by 2.5cm. Forces can reach up 1N. Originally, Wingman
mouse was conceived for video-games. However, some
research in accessibility [24] [7] have used this device.

Figure 1. Wingman force feedback mouse
Immersion Corporation proposes a plug-in for Internet
Explorer TM . The plug-in give the possibility of controlling the mouse via javascript programming.
2.2. Haptic perception with a force feedback mouse
Tactilo-kinesthetic or “haptic” system [18] consists of :
• cutaneous perception: it allows the perception of
the temperature, the pressure or the pain. The sensory receptors are located under the skin.
• The kinesthetic perception: it makes it possible to
feel the position and the movements of the body.
For instance, it enables us to know the weight, the
shape and the position of an object which we are

handling. It is relayed by sensory receptors located
in the muscles and the tendons[3]
The handling of a force feedback pointing device, as a
mouse, is based on the kinesthetic perception of the arm
and the hand. The cutaneous perception is not stimulated.
Thus, in our approach, it is not question of feeling a texture, but of perceiving the places where our hand is located
during the handling of the mouse.

Figure 3. Longuet-Higgins (left) and Steedman (right)
harmony representation

2.3. Relative localization
Due to the sensory memory associated with our kinesthetic perception, we can mentally represent the positions
of the objects. It is what we call the “relative localization”.
For instance, in the ﬁgure 2,a blind user will recognize the
relative disposition of some french counties on a map (top
example); or, on the bottom example, he will know where
the left arm of the skeleton is.

these 6 notes may be considered as the “most harmonically closed” notes: minor and major thirds, and perfect
ﬁfth.
Compared to the original representation, we carried out
a rotation of 60 degrees in order to preserve the intuitive
correlation between pitch height of the note and direction
at the screen: the movements toward the bottom of the
screen will always make the sound to go up (Figure 4).
The main characteristics of this representation are :
• vertical axis consists of perfect ﬁfths;
• axis diagonal-right consists of major thirds; and
• axis diagonal-left consists of minor thirds.

Figure 2. Relative localization
Coupled to an audio feedback, this approach will enable blind users to rebuild a mental image of an object
starting from the elements of this object. [22]
We present now how to apply this approach to the music learning ﬁeld.
Figure 4. Our steedman representation
3. SEEDMAN REPRESENTATION
In order to use the same approach for music, we need a
spatial representation of musical data. All of the intervals
in tonal music can be represented as combinations of the
fundamental intervals the octave, the perfect ﬁfth and the
major third [12] et [13]. This creates a three dimensional
harmonic representation although in practice we can represent the space of notes in two dimensions by collapsing
the octave dimension into a single layer (Figure 3).
There is a further enhancement to this space that can be
made and this was proposed by Mark Steedman [19]. We
can offset the rows of the space by half units to create a
space that allows any particular note to have six adjacent
members arranged hexagonally (Figure 3).
We have chosen this representation because the 6 neighboring notes of an hexagon are equidistant from the original note. The Fitts law [6] give an equal movement time
to access to these 6 neighborhood hexagons. Moreover,

The most important property is the following one: a
chord consist of several connected hexagons which represent a speciﬁc shape, whatever the tonality. The ﬁgure 5
shows the shapes of the implemented chords.

Figure 5. Implemented chords

Due to this property, a blind user (and even a sighter
user) only have to learn a chord speciﬁc shape, in order to
recognize it. Compared with the traditional musical notation, this is a advantage in a training task.
For instance, a diminished 7th in E and in F are shown
on ﬁgure 6. Chords shapes are different, alterations are
different, but it is the same chord. With the Steedman
representation, the diminished 7th chord consists of four
hexagons, whatever the scale.

The ﬁgure 8 shows how our system works. For more
details about used sofware, see [20, 10, 14, 16].

Figure 8. overview of the system
Figure 6. Different shapes in traditional notation, but it is
the same diminished 7th chord; the same chord in Steedman representation
Moreover, if two chords, in traditional musical notation, seems to have the same “shape”, their nature may be
different. For instance, on the ﬁgure 7, the two chords are
similar. But, in fact, one is a in major mode, while the
other is in minor mode. The Steedman representation distinguishes a minor triad chord from a major triad chord,
whatever the scale, due to the orientation of a isosceles
triangle : left-oriented for a major triad and right oriented
for a minor triad.

5. MUSIC HAPTIC : FEATURES OF OUR
PROTOTYPE
In our prototype, we use the Steedman representation in
order to present the different chords to the user.
Two mode are available : Exploration mode and chord
mode. In exploration mode, the user can freely explore
the checkerwork of hexagons. Each note is “displayed”
with a force feedback (Figure 9) and the note is played in
the same time.

Figure 9. one note and its force feedback
Figure 7. Same shape in traditional notation, but F Major
on the left and E Minor on the right

4. MUSIC HAPTIC : TECHNICAL ASPECTS
We have chosen a WEB applications context. We have
based our prototype on a client-server architecture.
On the server side, we use Apache Web server. On the
client side, we use Microsoft TM Internet Explorer. Nowadays, it is the only browser which support the Immersion
Web Plug-in.

Keyboard enable to switch in the different chord mode
(major and minor triad, augmented triad, and so on ; see
ﬁgure 5). In this conﬁguration, the user only explores
the notes of this chord. This mode enables a blind user
to learn the speciﬁc shape of a chord. For example a
right oriented isosceles triangle is a major triad chord (Figure 10).
The last feature enable a sighted user to ask for the traditional musical notation of the chord. Information sharing between sight and blind user is easier thank to this
feature.

[9] H OLLAND , S. Artiﬁcial intelligence in music education: a critical review. In Readings in Music and
Aritﬁcial Intelligence, Contemporary Music Studies,
E. Miranda, Ed., vol. 20. Harwood Academic Publishers, The Netherlands, 1999.
[10] I MAGE M AGICK.
web
site
http://www.imagemagick.org/, 2005.

at

:

Figure 10. Major triad : force feedback hexagonal display
and traditional notation dynamically generated

[11] I MMERSION C ORPORATION.
web site at :
http://www.immersion.com, 2005.

6. OUTLOOKS AND CONCLUSION

[12] L ONGUET-H IGGINS , H. Letter to a musical friend.
Music Review (August 1962), 244–248.

We currently set up a test protocol to evaluate our approach near different public : blind people, children and
autists. The ﬁrst blind user feedbacks we got were encouraging. We will also carry on with the development of our
prototype dedicated to the training of the harmony. In particular we will propose the possibility of recording its own
music; the creation of a chord could be done for example
via a gesture recognition with the mouse.
7. REFERENCES
[1] B RAILLE M USIC E DITOR.
http://www.dodiesis.com/.

web site at :

[2] B RANDAO , P. . W. Computers in music education.
In Proceedings of the AISB’99 Symposium on Musical Creativity, (1999), AISB.
[3] B URDEA , G. Force and touch feedback for virtual reality. Wiley-Interscience; 1 edition (August
3, 1996), 1996.

[13] L ONGUET-H IGGINS , H. Second letter to a musical
friend. Music Review (Nov. 1962).
[14] LYLIPOND.
web
site
http://www.lilypond.org/web/, 2005.

at

:

[15] O FFEN , D., AND T HOMLINSON , B. Good vibrations: Using a tactile mouse to convey page layout
information to visually impaired computer users. In
Proceedings of CSUN’S Sixteenth Annual International Conference :”Technology and Persons with
Disabilities”, Los Angeles (2001).
[16] OPENOFFICE . ORG.
web
http://www.openofﬁce.org/, 2005.

site

at

:

[17] R AMSTEIN , C., M ARTIAL , O., D UFRESNE , A.,
C ARIGNAN , M., C HASS , P., AND M ABILLEAU , P.
Touching and Hearing GUIs: Design issues for the
PC-Access System. In ASSET’96, ACM/SIGCAPH.
In 2nd Annual ACM Conference on Assistive Technologies, Vancouver, BC, Canada (1996), pp. 2–9.

[4] C ASTAING , J. Musicdraw : to make music learning
attractive. In Forth MUSICNETWORk Open Workshop : http://www.interactivemusicnetwork.org/
(Barcelona, Spain, September 2004), Universitat
Pompeu Fabra.

[18] R EVESZ , G. Psychology and art of the blind. New
York: Longmans, 1950.

[5] C OLWELL , C. Haptic virtual reality for blind computer users. In Proceedings of ASSETS’98, Third
International Conference on Assistive Technologies
(1998), pp. 92–99.

[20] SVG. Scalable vector graphics (svg) 1.1 speciﬁcation. http://www.w3.org/TR/SVG/ (2003).

[6] F ITTS , P. The information capacity of the human motor system in controlling the amplitude of
movement. Journal of Experimental Psychology 47
(1954), 381–391.
[7] G ARDNER , J. A., AND B ULATOV, V. Smart ﬁgures,
svg, and accessible web graphics. In Proceedings
of Technology And Persons With Disabilities Conference 2001, Los Angeles (2001).
[8] H OLLAND , S. Direct manipulation tools for novices
based on new cognitive theories of harmony. In
Proceedings of 1987 International Computer Music
Conference (1987), pp. 182 –189.

[19] S TEEDMAN , M. The formal description of musical
perception. Unpublished phd, University of Edinburgh, University of Edinburgh, 1972.

[21] T OCCATA.
Optek systems. web site at
:
http://members.optusnet.com.au/
terryk/toccata.htm.
[22] T ORNIL , B., AND BAPTISTE -J ESSEL , N. Use of
force feedback pointing devices for blind users. In
User Interfaces for All (2004), pp. 479–486.
[23] W IES , E. F., AND AL . Web-based touch display
for accessible science education. In Haptic HumanComputer Interaction (2001), pp. 52–60.
[24] Y U , W., R AMLOLL , R., AND B REWSTER , S. Haptic graphs for blind computer users. Lecture Notes in
Computer Science 2058 (2001), 41–49.

