Yale University Department of Music

Fugue and Rhetoric
Author(s): Gregory G. Butler
Source: Journal of Music Theory, Vol. 21, No. 1 (Spring, 1977), pp. 49-109
Published by: Duke University Press on behalf of the Yale University Department of Music
Stable URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/843479
Accessed: 15/12/2009 12:39
Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of JSTOR's Terms and Conditions of Use, available at
http://www.jstor.org/page/info/about/policies/terms.jsp. JSTOR's Terms and Conditions of Use provides, in part, that unless
you have obtained prior permission, you may not download an entire issue of a journal or multiple copies of articles, and you
may use content in the JSTOR archive only for your personal, non-commercial use.
Please contact the publisher regarding any further use of this work. Publisher contact information may be obtained at
http://www.jstor.org/action/showPublisher?publisherCode=duke.
Each copy of any part of a JSTOR transmission must contain the same copyright notice that appears on the screen or printed
page of such transmission.
JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide range of
content in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and facilitate new forms
of scholarship. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.

Duke University Press and Yale University Department of Music are collaborating with JSTOR to digitize,
preserve and extend access to Journal of Music Theory.

http://www.jstor.org

FUGUE AND RHETORIC

Gregory G. Butler

Toward the end of the fifteenth century, largely as a result
of the growing influence of humanism, a trend can be detected in certain musical circles toward an increasing awareness of, and stress upon, the great affinity between music and
poetry.' As a result, music came to be viewed more and more
as a highly affective form of artful expression imbued with all
the learned artifice and persuasive qualities of its sister art,
poetry. One of the most important and fascinating aspects of
this trend is the application of rhetoric, whose precepts
govern poetic creation, to music.
Classical rhetoric is divided into five distinct branchesinvention, disposition, elocution, memorization, and pronunciation. Of these elocution or eloquence, the decoration or
embellishment of speech by clothing and filling it out by
means of various rhetorical figures, was the prime consideration in the rhetoric of the Renaissance. In the later sixteenth
century in the northern European countries of Germany,
France, and England, the trend toward the application of
rhetorical precepts to music manifests itself in a particular
predilection on the part of theorists to refer to certain
49

musical structures and compositional techniques in terms of
specific rhetorical figures. From the very beginning of this
movement, fugue is conspicuous as the most frequently
mentioned of these techniques. Gallus Dressler (1533-c.1585),
the most important musica poetica theorist before Joachim
Burmeister, was prompted to remarkthat "in musica poetica,
nothing is more worthy for insertion [in a composition] than
fugae. Indeed, they embellish music and they result in music
constructed according to nature and art."2 Why was the fuga
elevated to such a preeminent position as a musical-rhetorical
element?
First of all, it must be realized that this whole movement was
largely highly learned and intellectual, even academic,in nature,
and of course the fuga was looked upon as a highly learned
element of composition. Secondly, the fuga was a structure of
great artifice and at the same time a highly expressive and
affective musical force, and therefore highly valued as a powerful musical-rhetoricaldevice. Thirdly, poetry deals largely with
verbal imagery, and there is growing evidence that the fuga
was thought of in terms of a highly artificial musical image,3
and was therefore a prime ingredient of musica poetica.
The study which follows will illuminate the development
and evolution of fugue as one of the most important of the
multitide of musical-rhetorical structures. In a period when
discussions of fugue in theoretical sources are almost completely of a practical and highly technical nature, such a
study is absolutely essential for a deeper understanding of
the way in which the composer and theorist conceived of
fugue in rhetorical terms.
Almost four decades before the statement by Dressler
quoted above, there is early evidence of the application of
the names of rhetorical figures to musical structures. In what
seems to be the earliest instance of such an application,
reference is made to only a single rhetorical figure which,
significantly, is applied to the fuga. As early as 1537, Joannes
Stomius (1502-1562)4 begins his discussion of the fuga as
follows:
INGENIOSA, QUAS MIMESES SEU FUGAS appellant:
ubi eadem vox a pluribus, sed certis temporum spaciis
intervenientibus, consequenter canitur.
50

Things ingenious, which are called Mimeses or fugae, where
a single voice is sung in consequence but with certain intervals of time intervening.5
Stomius here refers to the fuga, meaning in this case canon,
as a specific rhetorical figure, mimesis. Almost equally important is the fact that on the same page, he uses the name of
this figure as a generic designation in the title of his musical
example-Mimesis. IIII. vocum. Authore Ludovico Senflio.
Mimesis (imitatio) refers to the literal repetition of one person's words by another person, usually for the purpose of
emphasis.6 This process of mimicry involves not only exact
imitation of a verbal model in very close consequence (the
use of consequenter here is significant), but also implies a
response from separate and distinct sound sources; as such,
the device is very close in concept to the canon, to which
structure it is applied. Although in this first appearance of
the musical-rhetorical figure, the particular figure in question
is highly general in nature, there is nevertheless a close
parallel between rhetorical figure and musical structure.
This close identification of the fuga with mimesis remains the
most common fugal-rhetorical application throughout the
whole period under discussion and even beyond, right up to
the present day.
The first truly extensive treatment of the application of
rhetorical figures to musical procedures is that which appears
in a treatise entitled De musica (after 1559)7 of Anonymous
of Besanqon; but even here, only four basic figures are
discussed:
Prima Graecis dicta est VrXOK: Latinis copulatio. Sed
vulgus nunc cantorum fugam nominat. Est autem ploce,
vocum repetitio similium aliquo modo parallela, hoc est,
partium collatione aequali, vel simili, sibi inter se respondentium.
The first figure is called pl6ke in Greek, copulatio in Latin.
But among singers, it is now commonly referred to as fuga.
It is however ploce, a parallel repetition of similar tones in
a certain way, that is, a uniform or like comparison of
parts corresponding to one another.8
It is clear that this theorist is struggling with a highly
51

complex and involved musical-rhetorical concept, for he
introduces no less than three distinct rhetorical figures in
his attempt to define this concept clearly. All three of these
figures have one aspect in common, the element of repetition.
Beyond this, they all carry characteristic nuances of meaning
which convey a comprehensive picture of diverse elements
integrated under one musical procedure. The theorist himself
defines one of these three figures, ploce, which involves a
special kind of repetition in which there is parallel reiteration
of similar elements.9 This concept of parallelism is important,
for it has a number of implications for fugue. It supposes first
of all a simultaneous progression of two elements in tandem,
the one moving at a certain fixed distance from the other.
This concept is remarkably close to the fuga as a close point
of imitation at a given vertical pitch interval. At the same
time, parallelism implies the comparison of analogous elements, a concept which emerges clearly in the definition
given by the theorist himself in the above passage.Comparison
(collatio), the process by which similarity or dissimilarity is
established, is of course one of the most basic procedures in
logical reasoning. This likening of the fuga to a logical procedure is further reinforced by the use of the term collatio
in the definition of ploce. Collatio is itself a rhetorical figure,
a procedure involving a comparison made between two analogous elements, as the result of a logical sequence in which a
similitude is developed to a full comparison.10 Thus the
sequence of entries which makes up the fugal exposition is
seen as a strictly logical series.
The simplest of the four rhetorical terms presented in the
above passage is copulatio, which is simply the vehement
repetition of a single word or short phrase in rapid succession
with a minimum of intervening material, for the purpose of
amplifying a subject.1 This is an excellent capsule description of the fuga, a close point of imitation. At the same time,
it clearly outlines the basic purpose behind fugal imitation
in rhetorical terms, the elaboration or extension (amplificatio)12 of the subject of a discourse (propositio).
Copulatio, it should be stressed, was valued by rhetoricians
as a forceful manner of speaking which served to make a deep
impression on the minds of the audience.13 This strong
52

psychological or affective impact was not lost on Anonymous
of Besangon, who clearly alludes to this facet in the concluding summation to his discussion of the fuga:
Sed quoniam in re musica varietas prima est, quae in similitudine delectat; quae vero sine varietate & sine modo
aliquo novo atque inexpectato continuantur, satietatem
pariunt: repeti licebit frequenter idem prorsus vocum
systema: sed utique ex uno loco transpositum in alium, ne
idem omnino canamus, sed aliud: & una cum similitudine,
dissimilitudo agnoscatur.
But since in musical matters, variety is the prime consideration, whatever is in the nature of a similitude attracts
attention. Whatever things are continued utterly without
variety and without any novel or unexpected aspect produce satiety. Frequently, the same complex of tones can
be repeated straightway but only if it is transposed from
one place into another, provided that we do not sing
literally the same complex altogether, but another, and
together with similitude, dissimilitude is perceived.14
While he stresses variety as the ideal, the author is quick to
point out that the similitude offered by the fuga is important
since it acts as an effective contrast to variety, thereby
"attracting attention." However, he places conditions on
repetition and stresses that the fuga does not involve literal
repetition, but rather transposes and melodically slightly
alters the repeated elements.
Anonymous of Besanqon is unique among the early music
theorists who apply rhetorical precepts to music in the large
number of figures he cites in his attempt to arrive at a clear
and comprehensive delineation of the rhetorical concept of
fugue. Later musica poetica theorists, like Stomius early in
the century, invariably adopt the simplistic, and by now
traditional, rhetorical view of fugue in terms of imitation
(mimesis, imitatio) or repetition (anaphora, repetitio).
Gallus Dressier, in the treatise of 1564 mentioned above, is
typical in that he refers to the fuga simply as repetitio.sl
However, with his subsequent description of fugal imitation
as being established by means of an "emphatic, ordered
sequence" ("ordine expressa"),16 he clearly presents an
53

affirmation of the rhetorical concept implicit in Anonymous
of Besangon's application to the fuga of the term copulatio.
Later, he relates the specific fugal procedure in which the
interval of time between the successive entries of the subject
is varied, to the rhetorical figure, emphasis. In so doing, he
adds a new rhetorical dimension to the fuga:
Aliquoties fit ut unius fugae per diversa intervalla instituatur repetitio, quae, cum singulae voces se ipsas fugando
imitari videantur, auribus non mediocrem affert delectationem intervenientibus vocalibus emphasin praeseverantibus.'7

Sometimes it happens that the repetition of one fuga is
built up through various time intervals, which, when single
voices seem to be imitated by averting one another, brings
to the ears no moderate degree of pleasure, the intervening
singers being cut off prematurely by means of emphasis.18
Emphasis can be defined on two distinct rhetorical levels.
In a very general sense, it refers simply to an imposing or
forceful style of writing which imparts rhetorical stress, a
synonym

for the Latin terms pondus19 or significdtio.20 It

also refers to a more specific rhetorical figure in which a
deeper meaning is revealed than is actually expressed by the
words themselves. This usually consists in the suppression or
deliberate omission of a word or a group of words.21 In the
case under discussion, just as Stomius had before him,22
Dressier seems to be employing the term in its general sense
to apply to the strong rhetorical effect which results when an
entry of the subject breaks in prematurely, interrupting a
preceding entry before it is complete.
Joachim Burmeister (c.1566-1629) is by far the most
important of the later musica poetica theorists, and a figure
who plays a vital role in the present discussion. He also treats
the fuga in very general terms, as the musical procedure "in
which all the notes of a melody are imitated for some considerable time in the statement of each part in its etymological relation at the same or equal intervals of time."23 However, it is his peripheral discussion of the fuga, peppered as it
is with rhetorical terminology and concepts, which contributes substantially to our knowledge of how the fuga was
54

perceived rhetorically by musicians around the close of the
sixteenth century.
To begin with, it is significant that to the traditional
concept of the fuga as mimesis quoted above, Burmeister
adds the qualifier, "in its etymological relation" ("in suo
conjugio").24 From this, it would seem that Burmeisterviews
each of the entries of the subject in a given fugal exposition
as words, linked etymologically with all of the other similar
entries in that exposition, there being a common derivation
from an invariable root or primitive. To this basically grammatical conception, Burmeister adds a logical view with his
cryptic statement that "one [?] can be tested and weighed
carefully, even, in practice, transformed through many [? ] ."25

Here, Burmeister seems to be alluding to the standard rhetorical procedure of confirmation (confirmatio) of the initial
subject or proposition by the process of amplification and
transformation by repetition. In so doing, he supports Anonymous of Besangon's earlier reference to the fugal exposition
as a logical series.
Slightly later, Burmeister treats at greater length the
grammatical concept of the fuga to which he had alluded
earlier:
Vacua ulterius loca aptis & appositis concordibus
conjugatis characteristicis sonorum complebuntur, quo
spontaneum, vix cum labore, incrementum consequetur
syntaxis.

..

The empty place that lies beyond is filled up with fitting
concords in apposition, etymologically related by distinctive qualities of sounds, whereby spontaneous augmentation
with scarcely any effort follows as a consequence by
means of syntax . .. 26
It is clear from this passage that Burmeister views each point
of imitation as a unit filling up a block of space, as a word or
phrase to which each subsequent appearance of the same
point is fused in grammatical apposition and linked etymologically through the close similarity of the vertical concords
generated between the pair of entries in each point. Finally,
the whole series of points in the larger structural sense is
strictly regulated by syntax, a separate branch of grammar
55

dealing with orderly and logical grammatical arrangement.
Burmeister's use of the term incrementum in the above
passage is also significant, for it is a specific rhetorical procedure, one of the four principal methods of amplification.27
Since amplification is the principal means of confirmation,
the use of this term would seem to support the idea that
Burmeister saw the fuga as an amplificatory series of repeated
points constituting a confirmation.
As Dressler had before him, Burmeister stresses the efficacy of the fuga as the introductory section (exordium) in
the musical oration:
Exordium, est prima carminis periodus, sive affectio,
Fuga ut plurimum exornata, qua auditoris aures & animus
ad cantum attenta redduntur, illiusque benevolentia
captatur.
The exordium is the first section or affective period of
the composition, for the most part embellished with a
fuga, by which the ears and mind of the listener are rendered attentive to the music, and his sympathy is captured.28

Burmeister, however, goes further than his predecessors,
actually arrivingat a convincing explanation of the power of
the fuga to attract and hold the attention of the listener, a
power which Anonymous of Besancon had attributed simply
to its property of similitude as a strong contrast to constant
variety:
Hoc fieri animadvertitur ilico, ac nova affectio a Fugae
affectione prorsus aliena introducta apparet.
When this has occurred [i.e., when the opening statement
of the point of imitation has culminated in a cadence],
the mind is diverted immediately as a new statement
appears, a fresh element having been introduced all the
way through by means of the statement of the fuga.29
Burmeister sees the powerful psychological effect of the fugal
exposition as a consequence of its unique structure. Successive entries of paired points of imitation gradually fill up the
texture, but the structure is not complete until all such
56

entries have occurred. Each successive entry shatters the
silence of that pair of voices to that point. This diverts the
listener's attention suddenly from the previous simultaneously concluding entry, capturing and holding that attention throughout the duration of that particular entry and so
on, through the entire sequence of entries. Thus the diversion
of attention is not simple, but rather consists of a complex
periodic series of progressive new diversions.
Burmeister's treatment of fugue is vitally important in
another respect: he extends the application of rhetorical
figures to include a diversity of fugal techniques-double
fugue (metalepsis), counter fugue (hypallage), incomplete
entry of the subject (apocope), and incomplete exposition of
the subject (anaphora).
He defines the first of these, metalepsis, as "that style of
fuga in which two melodies in harmony on this side are taken
over on that side and are transformed into a fuga."30 A defi-

nition of the term in a rhetorical sense will serve to clarify
Burmeister's meaning. Metalepsis (transumptio) occurs when
a word or phrase is explained or clarified by another word or
phrase which is removed from the original expression by
certain degrees.31 The initial expression has no meaning by
itself and only acquires significance as a result of the subsequent related expression, so that the figure provides a transition by step to conclusion. For Burmeister, each point of
imitation presents a small-scalefuga, where the fugal imitation
occurs between each of the brief paired statements of the
subject. The fugal exposition similarly is considered to be a
fuga on a larger scale where it is the points of imitation themselves, the miniature fugae, which are presented in imitation,
naturally at a much greater time interval. In the case of the
simple fuga the scheme is clear right from the initial point of
imitation, since within its narrow confines it presents a fuga;
but when the initial point of imitation contains two distinctly
different subjects "on this side," the fugal scheme is not
clarified until the second identical point is stated "on the
other side." In the case of such a "fuga duplex," then, fugal
imitation does not take place between each of the paired
entries of the subject in a given point, but only on the larger
scale between the points themselves.
57

The term metalepsis has two further specific rhetorical
connotations,32 both of which have ramifications for the
later rhetorical concept of fugue in the Baroque. The first is
logical in nature, and refers to the understanding of an antecedent by means of a logical consequent, and vice versa. The
close identity with syllogistic reasoning suggested by this
definition is not stated explicitly, but it does emerge almost a
century later in the writings of one of the most important
Baroque theorists, Angelo Berardi. The second of these
meanings refers to the statement of a cause removed in time
from the statement of the effect close at hand. This concept
of subsequent entries of the fugal exposition standing in a
causal relationship to the initial entry is alluded to more
specifically by Burmeisterhimself in his discussion ofapocope,
as will be seen presently, and takes on great significance when
one considers the later Baroque analogy between comes and
aetiologia.
The second of Burmeister's four fugal figures, hypallage,
occurs "when a fuga is presented with the succession of
intervals inverted."33 It is obvious that the analogy between
hypallage as a rhetorical and as a musical figure is not exact,
for rhetorically, this figure involves lateral or horizontal
inversion of word order34which if applied to music literally
would involve retrogradation and not melodic inversion.35
Nevertheless, the process of inversion resulting in contraries
is vitally important in the larger rhetorical scheme. As indicated previously, Anonymous of Besancon considered the
fuga in terms of the rhetorical collatio, in which similitude is
developed to a full comparison. However, an equally valid
and common rhetorical procedure is the arrival at a full
comparison by the juxtaposition and examination of contraries through the property of dissimilitude. This aspect of
juxtaposition of contraries also gives rise to opposition, one
of the most vital aspects of rhetoric, particularly its dialectical side. This is of tremendous importance for the later
rhetorical concept of fugue in the Baroque.
Apocope and anaphora, the third and fourth of these fugal
figures, both have to do with incompleteness of the fuga. The
former refers to the case in which one or more entries of the
subject are "ripped away from the fuga,"36 and the latter to
58

the case in which the subject is not carried systematically
through all the voices of the texture, leaving the fugal exposition incomplete.37 Although Burmeister does not go into the
affective or psychological significance of this process of
abbreviation, it should be noted that the resulting effect, the
defeat of expectation, was taking on vital importance as an
affective musical-rhetoricaldevice at this time.38
Apocope, as a rhetorical figure, refers to the excision of a
syllable from the end of a word,39 and as such, is very close
to its fugal analogue where fragments of one or more entries
of the subject are "ripped away from the fuga." In light of
the above discussion concerning the causal relation of subsequent entries of the subject to the initial entry, it is interesting that Burmeister attributes the abbreviation here to "a
pruning of some cause, which takes place in one voice or
another."40

The analogy between anaphora, the repetition of the same
subject at the beginning of successive clauses of sentences,41
and the incomplete fugal exposition in which entries of the
subject do not occur in all voices, is not nearly so precise as
the others. Perhaps Burmeister was considering the figure
anaphora in very general terms, simply as repetition. He may
also be employing a contemporary turn-of-the-century usage
reflecting the trend toward the specific fugal procedure of
stating the subject only once at the beginning of each fugal
period following the initial full fugal exposition, a concept
which was to have great significance for fugue in its larger
structural ramifications later in the seventeenth century.
It is with Burmeister that the application of rhetorical
figures to such musical structures as the fuga reaches its
zenith in Germany. Even the most important of the German
musica poetica theorists writing after Burmeister, such as
Johannes Nucius (c.1556-1620), treat fugue in general,
simplistic rhetorical terms, employing the by this time commonplace rhetorical analogies of imitation and repetition.
In the three decades after the publication of Burmeister's
Musica poetica in 1606, it is largely in England42that the
forward impetus in the growth and evolution of musicalrhetorical application takes place.
One of the most comprehensive and important applications
59

of rhetorical figures to musical procedures appears in the
writings of Henry Peacham (the younger) (c.1576-c.1643),
who, in his discussion of music, declares:
Yea, in my opinion, no rhetoric persuadeth or hath
greater power over the mind. Nay, hath not music her
figures, the same which rhetoric? What is a revert but her
antistrophe? her reports but sweet anaphoras?her counterchange of points, antimetaboles? her passionate airs but
prosopopoeias? with infinite other of the same nature.43
What is so highly significant for the present discussion is
that of the four figures mentioned by Peacham, three involve
fugal procedures.
Thomas Morley states that "the reverting of a point (which
we also term 'a revert') is when a point is made rising or falling and then turned to go the contrary way as many notes as
it did first."44 Since in rhetoric antistrophe refers to the
inversion of word order in a phrase or sentences,45 the analogy here is identical with Burmeister's earlier linking of
melodic inversion and hypallage.
Peacham's equation of musical "reports" with rhetorical
anaphoras, however, differs from Burmeister's usage and
reflects clearly the broadening scope of the concept of fugue
as a more extensive structure. Morley speaks of "keeping
report,"46 and Charles Butler later defines the report as "the
iterating or maintaining of a point in the like motion,"47 referring to the periodic repetition of the subject throughout a
long work. This concept is clarified even further by the
etymological derivation of the word "report" (as it is used
here) from the French word report,48which is a continuation
by means of bringing forward or advancing an element
through periodic repetition.49 Thus it seems that by the
second decade of the century, the rhetorical figure anaphora
had begun to be applied to fugue in its strictest sense. Rhetorically, anaphora does not refer to simple repetition, the
sense in which Burmeister seems to use it, but rather to a
very specific type of repetition in which each one of a
number of successive clauses or sentences begins with the
same word. This more specific meaning clearly implies an
extended structure whose members are linked together by a
60

common element placed prominently at the beginning of
each member. This is remarkably close to the extended fugal
structures emerging at this time, in which at least one entry
of the subject serves to open each successive musical period.
Of Peacham's three fugal figures, the last, in which counterchange of points is related to the rhetorical figure antimetabole, is by far the most interesting since it introduces an
entirely new fugally related musical-rhetorical application.
The term counterchange seems to appear only once more in
an English musical theoretical source, in the writings over a
century later of Roger North,50 who uses it in the most
general terms. However, since counterchange has the specific
meaning of the interchange or exchange of parts or positions,51 it is used in exactly the same way as the parallel
German term, Verwechselung, to indicate contrapuntal
inversion. Although antimetabole (commutatio) is very
closely related to hypallage and antistrophe, all three having
to do with the inversion of word order to produce a contrary,
it is more specific in meaning. Antimetabole, unlike the other
two procedures, does not involve simple inversion of word
order, but an exact exchange or interchange of two elements,
each of which occupies the other's place in the transformed
phrase or sentence.52 As such, it serves to clarify and to
reinforce the meaning ascribed above to its analogous musical
figure, counterchange. There is nothing to suggest that
counterchange involves melodic as well as contrapuntal
inversion. Morley, however, does give two types of double or
invertible counterpoint.53 The first involves simple contrapuntal inversion; the second, which involves both contrapuntal and melodic inversion, he links closely with strict
canon.
A somewhat later English source, Francis Bacon (15611626), is no less important for his commentary on the
close relationship between certain rhetorical figures and
their musical counterparts, even though they are not so
completely given over to fugal structures. He writes that
"the Reports, and Fuges, have an Agreement with the Figure

in Rhetorick, ... .of

Repetition,

and Traduction."54 Bacon

makes the same analogy between reporting and repetition as
had Peacham before him, but with his equating of fugue and
61

traduction, we are introduced to yet another attempt to capture the essence of the fugal process in rhetorical terminology.
The rhetorical figure traduction,55a generic heading for such
figures as adnominatio and polyptoton, refers to a particular
kind of repetition in which the repeated element, although
directly derived from the initial word, is slightly altered by
changes in case, tense, part of speech, and the like.56 This may
in fact reflect an attempt on the part of rhetorician-musicians
to come to grips rhetorically with the fugal concept of the
tonal answer in which there are minor alterations in pitches
when the fugue subject is repeated, a procedure which was
coming to dominate fugal practice at this time. Traductio is
presented as an etymological figure in which an invariable
root undergoes slight variations. This strongly supports
Burmeister's insistence on the close relationship between a
series of entries of the fugue subject and a series of etymologically related ("conjugate") words.
With Charles Butler's treatise, The Principles of Music
(1637), which shows no advance over Peacham and Bacon
in the rhetorical treatment of fugue, the door is closed on
the strictly Renaissance musical-rhetorical approach to fugue
in terms of elocution. Rationalism, with its stress on logical,
coherent structure, was taking a strong hold in all areas of
artistic endeavor, and music was to prove no exception. In
1627, almost one hundred years after the first evidence of
the application of rhetorical figures to such structures as
fugue, we arrive at the watershed between the Renaissance
and Baroque in music theorists' treatment of fugue as a
musical-rhetorical structure, with the following comment by
MarinMersenne (1588-1648):
La Retorique enseigne comme il faut disposer le sujet
pour le mettre en Musique & apprend au Musicien comme
il faut imiter les figures de Retorique, en faisant divers
passages, dinimutions, fugues, consequences, &c.
Rhetoric instructs how the subject should be disposed in
order to put it into the music and teaches the musician
how he must imitate the figures of rhetoric in making
various passagi, diminuzione, fuge, conseguenze, etc.57
Although Mersenne here refers to fuge and conseguenze
62

(close canons) as "figures of rhetoric," he does so only in the
vaguest of terms, and only after first stressing the disposition
or logical organization of the subject within a musical structure. This element of logical structure is central to the
second of the aforementioned five branches of rhetoric,
disposition. Later, in the seventeenth century, disposition
replaced elocution as the primary concern of composers and
theorists in their continued close linking of rhetoric and
fugue.
General references to fugue as an extended rhetorical
discourse or oration, described variously as a conversation,
an argument, a dispute, a debate, and even as a battle among
a number of opposing parties, appear frequently in theoretical sources up to the end of the eighteenth century. The
first theorist to compare fugue with an extended rhetorical
structure is Athanasius Kircher (1602-80), who speaks of
fugue as "a series of fugae"

("series . . . fugarum") and

likens it to "the skillful connection of figures in oratory
through the faculty of rhetoric."58 Not only is the formation
of a larger structure by a series of points of imitation the
important aspect of fugue for Kircher, but he sees it as a
vital connective element in welding together figures to form
the complete oration itself. In this respect, he hearkens back
to Burmeister's concept of syntactic logical connection,
although this aspect of fugue is now applied on a much
larger scale. The English theorist, Christopher Simpson
(c. 1610-69), views the "repeating or renewing of the Fuge or
point.

. . when it comes in after some Pause or Rest . . .

as of a man that begins to speak again, after some little time
of silence."59 This concept of fugue as a discussion among
several people (voices) must have been widespread during
the late Baroque and is remarkably close to the concept of
strict contrapuntal writing attributed to J. S. Bach by his
first biographer, Johann Nikolaus Forkel (1749-1818).60
Thomas Mace (c.1613-1709) refers to fugue as "an Extention,"6' that is, as a discourse or oration amplifying a particular proposition or subject which is treated in music "as
a Theam, or as a subject matter in Oratory, on which the
Orator intends to discourse."62 Here we have the concept
63

of fugue as an extended rhetorical structure involving the
formal presentation of a subject or proposition followed by
the discourse or debate which is the outcome of this presentation. The use of the specific rhetorical term extension, the
structure which amplifies a subject,63is particularly interesting. Similarly, Roger North (1653-1734) writes that fugue
"hath a cast of business or debate, of which the melodious
point is made the subject."64
The leading German theorist, Johann Mattheson (16811764), in distinguishing between fugue and canon, refers to
the former as a "free oration" (freye Rede") and to the
latter as a "strict oration" ("solutam orationem").65 He sees
the various contrapuntalvoices in the fugue as "combattants"
("Kampfer") and the element of opposition between these
voices as a "pleasant dispute ("Luststreit").66 Elsewhere in
the same treatise, he expands greatly on Simpson's concept
of fugue as a conversation. In his discussion of imitation, of
which he considers fugue to be the mother,67 he writes as
follows:
eine Stimme die andre gleichsam Gesprachsweise unterhalte, Fragen aufwerffe, Antworten gebe, verschiedener
Meinung sey, Beifall erhalte, sich vereinbare, Wiederspruch
annehme u.s.w.
Denn, gleichwie eine Unterredung, da zu allen Vortragen
blosserdings Ja oder Nein gesaget, und keine Untersuchung
vorgenommen, keine Behauptung angebracht, keine Gegenrede verspiiret, kein kleiner freundlicher Streit erreget, ja,
gar keine Muihe genommen wird, es einander nach oder
auch zuvorzuthun, gar bald schlafrig macht, und schlechte
Freude erwecket: also erfordert auch eine jede Harmonie,
wenn sie gleich nur aus zwo Stimmen bestunde, eben solche
Er6rterung, Einwiirffe, Beispriiche und Lustgefechte in
den Klingen, die man durch kein bessers Mittel, als durch
die so genannte Nachahmung, welche mit ihrem Kunstworte, Imitatio, vel potius Aemulatio vocum heisset,
vorstellig machen kan.
one voice, so to speak, converses with the other after the
manner of a conversation, throws out questions, gives
answers, is of a different opinion, secures approval, is in
agreement, accepts opposition, etc.
64

For just as in the case of a conversation where simply
yes or no is said to all propositions, where no investigation
is undertaken, no proposition brought forward, no opposing statement perceived, no minor friendly dispute stirred
up, in short, where no struggle whatsoever is undertaken in
dealing with one another either before or after, one is
soon made quite sleepy, and little joy is aroused. In the
same way, each harmony, even if it consists only of two
voices, also requires just such debate, objection, qualification, diverting combat in sounds, which one can accomplish through no better means than through so-called
imitation, which is referred to by its art words, Imitatio, or
better, Aemulatio vocum.68
In this passage, Mattheson stresses the necessity of opposition in providing the combative atmosphere so vital for
diversion.

In his analysis of the fugue in d minor from the second
volume of J. S. Bach's Das wohltemperierte Clavier, Friedrich Wilhelm Marpurg(1718-95) refers to the fugue similarly,
as a "dispute" ("Streit")69in which the various voices join. In
his codification of the fugal practice of Francesco Antonio
Vallotti (1697-1780), Luigi Antonio Sabbatini (1739-1809)
refers to fugue as "representinga true and real combat among
two, three, four and more parts."70The foregoing references
represent but a general indication of a much deeper and more
far-reachingconcept of fugue as an extended rhetorical structure in the Baroque.
Although fewer in number, there are other references to
fugue during the Baroque which make a much more explicit
analogy, often technical in nature, between fugal structure
and rhetorical disposition. Before examining these, it is
necessary to acquire some understanding of the technical
aspects of rhetorical disposition itself.71 In the standard
classical disposition, the oration is divided into as many as
seven distinct sections-exordium (prooemium), [narratio],
propositio, [divisio], confirmatio, confutatio (refutatio),
peroratio (conclusio). The exordium is the beginning of the
oration, which should prepare the audience to listen with
interest. The narratio consists of the exposition of pertinent
65

topics, deeds, and events. It appears in square brackets here
because it is often considered optional. Its function is taken
over to some extent by the propositio, which involves a
formal statement or enunciation of the principal argument(s)
at issue. In the divisio, the propositio is broken down into
the particulars relevant to a specific aspect of the argument
in order better to explain the exact nature of the matter. It
too appears in square brackets above because it is often
considered more properly to form an integral introductory
element within the confirmatio, where arguments are cited
to support and strengthen the case. In the confutatio, arguments brought against the case by the opposing party are
refuted and dismissed. Finally, the peroratio should form a
convincing, artistic close to the oration, usually involving a
forceful conclusive statement of the argument.
As has already been stated, musical elocution, the application of rhetorical figures to musical structures, was the
primary preoccupation of the musica poetica theorists in
the sixteenth and early seventeenth centuries. Although it
seems to have been a subordinate rhetorical consideration
for these theorists, disposition nevertheless emerged as an
important element in structural considerations, and in the
early treatment of structure, the fuga appeared as an important element. In these early discussions,72the musical oration
is generally divided into three sections only-exordium,
medium (or "ipsum corpus carminis" as Burmeister refers
to it73), finis. Although the outer sections of the comprehensive scheme outlined above are clearly present here, the
five possible sections between them are subsumed together
under the general designation of medium.74 This basic tripartite musical-rhetorical disposition is evident in the first
explicit references to fugue as an extended rhetorical structure in the middle Baroque.
Mignot La Voye (fl.1650) refers to fugue as "that which
is related in some way with a gathering of a number of people
who, having debated one after the other about some proposed subject, all come to the same conclusion."75 This is
a very early, much more specific and comprehensive statement of the same analogy expressed later by Simpson,
Mattheson, and Forkel. What is so important here is the close
66

identification of fugue with the process of reasoning by
logical argument. Implicit in this passage is the notion of a
large-scale structure consisting of the proposition of the
subject, the argument or debate upon this subject, and the
arrival of all voices at the same conclusion. La Voye clearly
outlines the three subsections of the rhetorical scheme of
disposition, propositio, confirmatio, and conclusio. Concerning the last of these three sections, it is interesting to speculate as to whether La Voye means by "the same conclusion"
simply the final cadence of the fugue, or whether this is an
early reference to the much more complex concept of the
treatment of the thema in close canon, or stretto, as an element of conclusion. At any rate this appears to be the first
reference to fugue in which a definite, continuous structure
according to the incipient tripartite musical-rhetorical disposition scheme of the sixteenth century is given as the principal
determinant in arrivingat a viable concept and definition of
fugue as a largerstructure.
The musical theorist most enlightening on the close
relationship between fugal structure and rhetorical disposition
in the seventeenth century, largely because he relates unambiguously specific fugal techniques with specific sections of
the rhetorical disposition scheme, is Angelo Berardi(c.1635p.1693). In discussing music generally, he stresses the great
value of the other liberal arts in the formation of the musician. It is highly symptomatic of the times that in his general
discussion of rhetoric, Berardi closely links logic and rhetoric,
which "render man fit to argue."76 In so doing, he stresses
both the logical and the dialectical thrust of rhetoric current
at this time.
Berardi treats the rhetorical aspect of fugal structure at
some length. His fugal disposition features the same tripartite
structure as does La Voye's, but Berardi refers specifically
to the initial exposition of the thema as "la propositione
della fuge,"77 to the following intermediate section somewhat
vaguely as "qualche bel passagio,"78 and to the final division
as "il concludere."79 Like other theorists before him, Berardi
views the subject of the fugue as the propositio and refers
to the body of the fugue in rather vague terms. He is the
first theorist, however, to identify a specific fugal technique
67

with the conclusio of the fugue, where "the fugue [subject]
should be disposed in stretto."80 He attributes the particular
placement of this canonic section at the conclusion of the
fugue to its being full of artifice.81 This is completely in
accord with the basic definition of the peroratio given above,
in which artistry is stressed as a requisite concluding element.
Even more fascinating is Berardi's comparison of fugal
imitation with the basic structure of the art of logic, the
syllogism:
Altri l'hanno chiamata conseguenza, pigliando la denominatione dal silogisimo, che usano i Logici, si come in
quello posta la maggiore, e minore, se ne deduce la conseguenza, cosi dall'ordine, 6 modulatione posta dal Compositore in una parte, ne segue, che in conseguenza si possa
da un'altra parte cantare l'istesso ordine, 6 modulatione.
Others have called it [fuga] conseguenza, taking the designation from the syllogism, which the logicians use. Just
as in the syllogism, one exposes the major and minor
[terms] and from these is deduced the consequent. Similarly, from a progression or melody exposed by the composer in one part, it follows that, as a consequence, the
same progression or melody can be sung by another
part.82

The term conseguenza had been used as early as the midsixteenth century by such theorists as Zarlino to denote a
type of close imitation.83 Although it certainly is a technical
term employed in logic, Berardi is the first theorist to draw
attention to this derivation and in so doing, to view fugue
literally as being analogous to the process of reasoning by
logic.
The tripartite fugal-rhetorical disposition outlined above
had become crystallized by the end of the seventeenth
century, especially in Italy, where this basic scheme continued
well into the eighteenth century. It remained for German
theorists to rigorously apply the rhetorical disposition
scheme in its complete form to such musical structures as
fugue.
Writing to Mattheson on July 28, 1718, Johann Christoph
68

Schmidt (1664-1728),84 Capellmeister in Dresden, includes
the following observations on fugue writing:
Denn eine Fugam zu tractiren, muss ich die artificia
so wohl aus der Oratoria, als bey dem Stylo modemo,
nehmen, ob gleich darinne mehr die Harmonia, als Oratio, dominiret. Denn Dux ist Propositio: Comes Aetiologia, Oppositum ist Inversio varia Fugae; Similia geben
die veranderten Figuren der Proposition, secundum valorem; Exempla k6nnen heissen die propositiones Fugae in
andern Chorden, cum augmentatione & diminutione
Subjecti; Confirmatio ware wenn ich das Subjectum
canonisire; und Conclusio, wenn ich das Subject gegen die
Cadenze, in Imitatione, iiber eine notam firmam horen
lassen, der ander artificiorum zu geschweigen, welche in
Eintretung des Subjecti anzubringen und zu observiren
sind.
For in order to treat a fugue, I must take artifice just as
much from oratory as from the modern style, although
music dominates more in this than does oration. For the
dux is propositio; the comes, aetiologia. Oppositum is
the varied inversion of the fugue. Similia indicates the
altered notes of the propositio according to value. Exempla can refer to the propositiones of the fugue in other
keys with augmentation and diminution of the subject.
Confirmatio would be when I treat the subject in canon,
and conclusio, when I cause the subject to be heard in
imitatione over a long held note toward the cadences, not
to mention the other artifices which are to be brought in
and observed in the entry of the subject.85
The structural scheme applied here by Schmidt to fugue
is a pedagogical variant of the classical disposition scheme
of rhetoric, the chria.86 As treated by one of the leading
German rhetoricians of the period, Christoph Weissenborn, the chria consists of four distinct sections which
compare with the classical rhetorical disposition scheme
as follows:87
69

CHRIA

pro tasis
aetiologia (probatio)
.
~~~~~~......
amplificatio
......
..
conclusio

DISPOSITIO
exordium
narratio
propositio
.divisio
confutatio
confirmatio
conclusio

Weissenbor distinguishes between a "simpler chria" ("leichtere chria") and a "more complex chria" ("schwerere
chria"),88 the only difference between the two being an
extension of the amplificatio in the latter by a greater working out.
The chria lacks the initial two sections of the classical
disposition scheme, exordium and narratio, commencing
immediately with the protasis or principal thesis, synonymous with the propositio. The chria then presents a new
section not found in the classical disposition scheme, aetiologia or probatio. Aetiologia is the process of assigning
causes for effects given89 and therefore its function is to
further clarify and elaborate the protasis. The alternate
terminology given for this section by Weissenborn,probatio,
would indicate that it was looked upon as a proof or demonstration; it is interesting that probatio was sometimes given
by rhetoricians as the third division of the oration, i.e.,
prooemium, [narratio], propositio, probatio, etc.90 It is clear
that aetiologia acts as a qualifying, explicative element, and
is therefore closely bound to the propositio as a consequent
element in a causal relationship. Thus it has been bracketed
together with protasis above in parallel with propositio. The
next two sections in the classical disposition scheme, confirmatio and confutatio, both involve the statement of
arguments, the former to strengthen the case, the latter to
refute arguments brought against it by an opposing party.
Thus it is not surprising that these two sections were often
linked together under the single term contentio, and their
particular sequence in the dispositio scheme seems to be
reversible.91Weissenborn, under amplificatio, gives four basic
70

methods of amplification-a contrario, a comparato, ab
exemplo, and a testimonio.92 Both the chria and the classical dispositio scheme end with the conclusio. It is significant
for later discussion of this closing section that Weissenborn
typifies it as consisting of either a repetition of the protasis
(propositio), or a logical consequent in the form of an axiom
or a wish, commonly in the form of a short verse.93
Weissenborn
Schmidt
propositio (dux)
aetiologia (comes)
oppositum (inversion)
similia (alteration in duration of notes of subject)
ab exemplo
exempla (transposition, augmentation, diminution)
a testimonio
......
......
..
confirmatio (stretto)
conclusio
conclusio (closer stretto
over pedal)
It is interesting that Schmidt's fugal-rhetorical dispositio
scheme follows the chria almost literally, the only exceptions being that he dispenses with the testimonium among
the various procedures of argumentation included under
amplificatio, giving only the first three of these-oppositum
(a contrario), similia (a comparato), and ab exemplo,
there being no musical structure analogous to testimonium
applicable. Also he inserts confirmatio between amplificatio and conclusio. In so doing, he has presented a hybrid
structural scheme, predominantly from the chria, but
with slight reference to the classical disposition scheme
of rhetoric. Most fascinating for this study, however, is
Schmidt's linking of specific fugal techniques with each of
the sections and subsections of this musical-rhetorical dispositio scheme. He thus continues, on a truly comprehensive
scale, a process begun just over three decades earlier by
Berardi with his linking of stretto and conclusio.
Each of these sections of the rhetorical dispositio scheme
and their respective fugal applications must now be examined
protasis
aetiologia
amplificatio - a contrario
a comparato

71

and discussed in light of the writings of other theorists from
this period.
Schmidt begins his discussion of fugal-rhetorical disposition with the propositio in keeping with the parallel structural scheme of the chria, dispensing with exordium and
narratio.94On rare occasions, the fugue itself, most often a
vocal fugue, begins with a short, full-textured, predominantly
homophonic section which is usually highly imposing and
portentous and employs the thema of the fugue somehow in
its construction. Sabbatini refers to these brief introductory
complexes as "the figure of the prologue or exordium which
with its few measures should always announce the subject
matter or affect of the fugue."95
We turn now to a discussion of the first section of the
fugal-rhetorical disposition scheme proper, the propositio.
Mattheson refers to the propositio as "the strict statement"
containing "the subject or purpose of the piece."96 As is
evident from passages quoted above, the conception of
propositio had been associated first with the fuga as conceived as a complete unit in the sixteenth century, and later
in the seventeenth century simply with the thema. There is
no change in this concept in the eighteenth century. Both
Mattheson and Sabbatini97view the thema of the fugue in
terms of a propositio, the former referring to the thema as
"what for the orator, is the text or subject."98 Schmidt, as
his discussion of fugal-rhetorical disposition would indicate,
differentiates more clearly, viewing only the initial statement
of the thema, the dux, as the propositio.
For Mattheson, the rhetorical parallel goes further than
simple analogy between thema and propositio, bearing on
the actual construction of the thema:
Bey

dem

Themate

oder

Hauptsatze,

. . .mussen

gewisse besondere Formuln im Vorrath seyn, die auf
allgemeine Vortrage*) angewandt werden k6nnen. Das ist
zu sagen: Der Setzer muss an Modulationen, kleinen
Wendungen, geschickten Fallen, angenehmen Gangen und
Spriungen, durch viele Erfahrung und aufmercksames
Anh6ren guter Arbeit, hie und da etwas gesammelt haben,
welches, ob es gleich in lauter eintzeln Dingen bestehet,
dennoch was allgemeines und gantzes, durch figliche
72

Zusammensetzung hervorzubringen verm6gend sey. Wann
ich z.E. folgende drey unterschiedene und abgebrochene
Gange im Sinn hatte: [Example 1] und aus denselben
einen an einander hangenden Satz machen wollte, k6nnte
derselbe etwa so aussehen: [Example 2]
Diese Specialien miissen aber nicht so genommen
werden, dass man sich etwa ein Verzeichniss von dergleichen Brocken aufschreiben, und, nach guter Schulweise, daraus einen ordentlichen Erfindungskastenmachen
misse; sondern auf dieselbe Art, wie wir uns einen Vorrath
an W6rtern und Ausdriickungen bey dem Reden, nicht
eben nothwendig auf dem Papier oder in einem Buche,
sondern im Kopffe und Gedachtniss zulegen ..
*)Specialia ad generalia ducenda nennen es die Redner.
As for the thema or principal statement, certain special
formulae must be kept in stock, which can be employed
in general enunciations.*) That is to say, the composer
must, through experience and attentive listening to good
work, have chosen from here and there, modulations,
small turns of phrase, suitable examples, agreeable conjunct and disjunct passages, which, whether it consists
purely of particular things, nevertheless is capable of
generating something general and complete through
suitable combination. For example, if I had in mind the
following three independent and distinct passages [Example 1] and out of these wished to make a statement dependent on another, the result might appear somewhat
as follows [Example 2].
These specials must, however, not be construed in such
a way that one writes down a sort of catalogue of such
fragments oneself and from that must construct an ordered
box of inventions after the fashion of proper erudition,
but rather in the same way as we continue adding to our
stock of phrases and expressions in oratory, not necessarily on paper or in a book, but rather in the head and
memory.

. .

*) Orators call it specialia ad generalia ducenda.99
These passages are crucial, for they reveal a facet of thematic
construction which has hitherto been overlooked. Mattheson
73

1
rr^B^
I

sees the thema as a general thesis which is the end result of
the synthesis of a number of special elements; and he quite
rightly likens this to the dialectical procedure of "proceeding from specials to generals" ("specialia ad generalia ducenda"). Moreover, from his description of these specials as
a stock of common elements taken from here and there and
preferably stored "in the head or memory," it is clear that he
is drawing a clear parallel with the whole process of memoria,
which earlier was probably the most vitally important of the
five branches of rhetoric. In this process a myriad of images
is stored in the memory by associating them with an organized place system such as that provided by the rooms in
a house.?00 These stock musical elements implanted in the
memory are referred to by earlier theorists as loci communes, or simply commonplaces. Most assuredly, it is exactly
this longstanding rhetorical tradition to which Mattheson is
here drawing attention. It will be necessary to return to this
concept of the thema as general thesis and the specials from
which it is synthesized presently in the subsequent discussion
of confutatio.
Thus far, only the generalconcept of the thema has been discussed. Certain more specific and detailed musical-rhetorical
applications in this particular section of the fugue must now
be considered. We will begin this discussion with the most
characteristic musical aspect of the fugal propositio, the
dux-comes combination. Schmidt refers to dux as propositio,
and comes as aetiologia. The concept of comes as a direct
causal consequence of dux implicit in the term aetiologia
had been clearly in evidence well over a century earlier in
Burmeister's discussion of the fuga, particularly in his treatment of the figures metalepsis and apocope. The same
approach is promulgated with even greater clarity by Berardi
in his musical-logical definition of comes as conseguenza. The
integral concept inherent in the analogy between comes
and the term probatio is also clearly a traditional one, established in Burmeister's statement that "one [propositio, that
is, dux]

can be tested and weighed carefully..

.

through

many [statements, i.e., comes and subsequent entries].""'
There is nothing then which is strikingly novel, except for
the new chriistic terminology, in Schmidt's conception of
75

the close causal and complementary structural relationship
between propositio and aetiologia (probatio).
Mattheson's concept, on the other hand, runs completely
counter to that of Schmidt's in that he sees the two, dux
and comes, as opposing elements:
Eine jede Fuge hat so zu reden zween Hauptkampfer,
welche die Sache mit einander ausmachen miissen. Der
eine heisst Dux, der andre Comes. . . . Der Anfihrer, oder

Ducem, begleitet sein Gefihrte, oder Comes. Doch geschiehet diese Nachfolge oder Begleitung in unterschiedlichen
Klangen, um dadurch eine gewisse Nacheiferung, eine
aemulationem oder einen Luststreit auszudrucken, als
worin fast der gantze Unterschied zwischen dem Fuhrer
und Gefahrten bestehet.
Each fugue has, so to speak, two principal combatants
who have to settle the issue with one another. The one is
called dux, the other, comes.

..

. The leader or dux

accompanies its follower or comes. Nonetheless, this
succession or accompaniment occurs in different keys,
thereby expressing a certain rivalry, an aemulatio or a
heated dispute. In this consists almost the entire difference
between the leader and the follower.102
For Mattheson, the opposition between dux and comes in
the initial exposition is tonal in nature, arising from the
close horizontal juxtaposition of statements of the thema
in sharply contrasting keys, usually tonic and dominant. In
fact, the comes often concludes with a pitch which is not an
element of the tonic chord because of the particular melodic
configuration of the thema. Moreover, unless the thema is
modulatory, the comes at its conclusion normally has
strongly established the dominant key. In both cases, there
is a need to return to the tonic for the subsequent entry of
the dux in that key, both on the purely practical compositional level, to effect smooth harmonic progression, and
also very importantly on the dialectical-rhetorical level, to
resolve the opposition which in this case consists of the
powerful tonal tension generated between dux and comes.
In actual practice, this is usually effected either by a modulatory passage involving sequential imitation of a fragment of
76

the thema, or by a more sudden chromatic shift. Mattheson
refers to such modulatory passages of resolution added after
the statement of the comes as conciliatio, a general dialectical
term for the process in which two different parties in opposition are brought together in agreement:
Noch ein Kunstwort, nachst obigen zweien, ist hiebey
zu betrachten.

....

Es heisst Conciliatio

Modorum, da

man ein Thema, dessen Schluss etwas ausserordentliches
hat, durch einen kleinen Zusatz in die rechte Gleise bringet,
und gleichsam mit dem anhebenden Nachsatze vers6hnet.
Still another art word, besides the above two, should
here be considered.

...

It is called conciliato modorum,

where one brings a thema, whose close has something
irregular about it, onto the right track through a small
addition, and as it were, brings it together into agreement
with the beginning subsequent statement.103
Slightly later, Mattheson refers more specifically to the
process of tonal opposition and its subsequent resolution
when he refers to the process as "bringing itself into agreement with the key: because it had, as it were, fallen out with
it over some matter,"104 at which time he gives a musical
example of conciliatio (Example 3). For Schmidt, then, dux
and comes are complementary elements, while for Mattheson
they are opponents, rivals locked in a dispute concerning the
principal argument, the thema or propositio. As will become
evident, it is the latter of these concepts which is in keeping
with the whole concept of fugue at this time.'05
A much more general rhetorical element involved with
successive entries in the thema must now be considered, that
of repetition. Sebastien de Brossard's(1655-1730) definition
of repetition indicates that this procedure was linked inseparably with fugue:
REPLICA, ou REDITTA. veut dire, REPLIQUEor REPETITION. C'est lorsqu'une Partie apres quelque silence
repette les memes Nottes, les memes Intervalles, le meme
mouvement, en un mot le meme Chant qu'une premiere
partie a deja dite pendant le silence de celle-cy. C'est la
proprement qui fait la fugue.
77

Example 3

Werde

r

-c,

f

ACR -

mein

Gemithe

J Jr
- J. L

r f

f
.

---

f

_

l
_

I.-

IIr

Fr

munter

_

rr

o'J

r

r r

r

X J

J

'

-r

r

J

X

j

Conciliatio

-

1:I

3::#

78

-

v

_

-

_

-

_

Replica or reditta means reply or repetition. This is when
one part, after some silence, repeats the same notes, the
same intervals, the same motion, in a word, the same
melody as a first part has already stated during the silence
preceding the second entry. Properly speaking, it is this
which gives rise to fugue.'06
Brossard seems to be pointing more precisely to the opening
repercussio of the fugue. Mattheson refers to the same aspect in his discussion of repetition, defining it as "what one
in fugal matters generally calls the repercussio, that is if I
transpose a certain phrase higher or lower."'07 He refers to
these repetitions as "clausulae synonymae,"'08 a rhetorical
term referring to a passage of exposition in which the sense
of the opening statement is clarified and elaborated on by
the use of consequent statements each of which has the
same meaning as the initial statement.'09
The aspect of repetition discussed above reflects the
tendency later in the seventeenth and early eighteenth centuries to view the term in a very general manner. However,
the actual term anaphora (repetitio) has a quite specific
meaning, namely, the repetition of the first word of a phrase
at the beginning of a number of parallel subsequent phrases.
This concept carried over into the eighteenth century;"? and
it is significant that musically, it is the fugue which most
perfectly exemplifies this procedure, since each period
begins with one or more statements of the thema.
We come now to the second section proper of the rhetorical dispositio scheme, the confutatio or refutatio. This is
the section in which the opposition to the propositio is
resolved by refutation.
In his discussion of musical-rhetorical disposition, Burmeister had described the second section of his tripartite
division, the corpus cantilenarum or medium, as "comprising congeries, by which texture, just as by the varied arguments of the confirmatio of rhetoric, minds are penetrated
so that a general truth [i.e., propositio] can be grasped and
examined more clearly.""' Burmeister's reference to the
important role of the rhetorical figure congeries (accumulation) in this section is significant, for congeries is probably
79

the most important of the four distinct techniques11 within
the more general process of amplificatio, the term which
corresponds in Weissenborn's chriistic dispositio scheme to
the classical confutatio."3
The figures incrementum (augmentation) and congeries
(accumulation) are very similar in nature, both consisting of
a rising climactic series of like elements. In their musical
adaptation, they consist of sequential repetition.14 Since this
is an element common to this portion of the musical structure not only in fugue, but in all musical genres of the period
under consideration, it will not be dwelt on further at this
point; but it should nevertheless be kept in mind, since it
was a basic aspect of musical-rhetorical argumentation in
the confutatio of the fugal-rhetorical dispositio scheme.
Applied to this basic sequential framework in the confutatio, however, was a musical technique highly germane
to the discussion of fugue-that of thematic fragmentation.
One of the first theorists to come to grips with this technique
as it was applied in those sections of the fugue between
entries of the thema was Giovanni Bontempi (c.1624-1705):
Nelle altre Parti, non potendo elleno havere i Soggetti
interi, si addatteranno i membri loro, che sono particelle
degli stessi Soggetti, introdotte non con infilzature d'intervalli non convenevoli per riempir le Parti, e formar con
quelle agevolmente il Mostro d'Horatio: ma con intervalli
ragionevoli, e con ragione o di Fuga o d'Imitatione: in
guisa tale, che non vi sia movimento alcuno, il quale non
habbia la sua relatione e convenienza [Example 4].
In the other sections, not being able only to have complete
subjects, their members are adapted. These are particles
of these same subjects, not with a stringing together of
periods not suitable for filling up the parts, and with ease
to fashion the prodigious feat of Horatio,"5 but with
rational periods, by means either of fuga or of imitatione.
This assures that there will be no progression whatsoever
which does not have its relation and connection"6 [Example 4].

Bontempi's terminology here is carefully chosen, highly technical in nature, and is most fascinating in light of Mattheson's
80

Example 4

rrrF

n

r-r-J

rfT

Guida

-

4c

jIJ

v

Consequente

fl
~-;

-

-

i

~

ofI i
t,l,

I

U
Vv
V

~

I

I liil.'

P
A
I ?

I

I
,

I

'

'

,

i

I

II

-_-

v

~

--,
-

I

I

I

r-

__
iI

_

i

I
,

I

I
I

I

I
,

I

'

..
,

I

Cad.
00

i

~

F
;--

,;

I

.,

I

I~

'

iI
-

CI

Memb.

I:-I

I

I

I I
I
I
IMemb
Memb.

,

:

I

I

conception of the thema as a universal or general composed
of a number of particulars or specials. Bontempi reinforces
this concept, referring to fragments of the subject as "particles" (particelle).17

This term had a very specific meaning,

referring to the smallest possible atomic units resulting from
subdivision of an element, reduction to particular matter
in the most strictly literal sense. Equally interesting, in this
case for its grammaticalsignificance, is Bontempi's use of the
word "members" (membri)118 for these fragments. This is
a specific, technical grammatical term, also called colon,
to indicate a portion of a sentence which-although succinct
and complete in its brevity-does not express the entire
thought, relying for completion on supplementation, ideally
by two further members.19 It is just this element of incompleteness inherent in such a fragment which creates, in conjunction with the climactic aspect of sequential repetition,
such a powerful effect. It demands continuation to and
completion by the eventual statement of the complete
sentence or thought (thema) in a subsequent section. Bontempi's emphasis on the need for logical connection and
relationship between sections with its resultant unity is
significant in light of the highly rational and logical approach
to fugue taken by such contemporaries as Berardi.
According to Mattheson, every musical propositio was
thought of as a general constructed by the synthesis of a
number of particulars. Bontempi here reveals that in the
subsequent section, the confutatio, the propositio as fugal
thema is subjected to the reverse process of decomposition
or analysis back into its particulars; and here one or more
of the resulting fragments is subjected to close musical
scrutiny, so that in a manner of speaking, these particulars
become the thema of the confutatio. This whole process,
then, is the reverse of the procedure described above by
Mattheson in connection with the construction of the thema
to be employed in the propositio, not "proceeding from
specials to generals" (specialia ad generalia ducenda), but
rather "proceeding from generals to specials" (generalia ad
specialia ducenda), a process basic to dialectic.
It is highly significant that it is precisely this abstract
dialectical technique of thematic fragmentation which lends
82

its name to a separate section in the classical rhetorical disposition scheme directly following the propositio, the divisio.120 In fact, the process of thematic fragmentation itself
is most often designated in musical-rhetorical theory by the
term distributio, a rhetorical figure for which the term
divisio is the most commonly employed synonym. Johann
Adolph Scheibe (1708-76) makes such a connection later in
the eighteenth century, and in doing so stresses this figure's
great effect in fugue:
Die VIIste ist die Zergliederung (Distributio.) Diese
geschiehet, wenn man einen Hauptsatz eines Stiickes auf
solche Art ausfihret, dass man sich bey jedem Theile
desselben nacheinander besonders aufhalt. Wenn man
etwa ein Thema zu einer Fuge, das etwas lang ware, so
zergliedern wollte, dass man zuerst einen Satz, oder Takt,
und alsdann auch das ubrige gleichsam zertheilet, ausfiihrte, und folglich alle Theile des Hauptsatzes, als besondere Satze betrachtete, und durch eine verschiedene Ausfihrung von einander absonderte. Dass diese Figur zur
geschickten und vollkommenen Ausarbeitung einer Fuge
sehr viel beytragt, erhellet bereits hieraus zu geniige.
The 7th [figure] is dissection (distributio). This occurs
when one works out the principal subject of a piece in
such a way that one dwells upon each part of it specially,
one part after another. If one wished perhaps to dissect
the thema of a fugue that was somewhat long, then one
would first treat one phrase or measure and then also
fragment in a similar manner what remained, and consequently would consider all parts of the principal subject
as special phrases and isolate these from one another by
different treatment. That this figure contributes a great
deal to the skillful and consummate working out of a
fugue, has already become abundantly clear from the foregoing.121

Scheibe stresses the concept of proceeding to specials,
referring in his discussion to treating fragments "specially"
and as "special phrases." He emphasizes in his concluding
statement the powerful dialectical potential of this figure
as a forceful, persuasive arguing agent:
83

Ueberhaupt aber muss diese Figur dazu dienen, den
Verstand nachdr(icklicher zu machen, und die Zuh6rer
gleichsam zu tiberzeugen.
Above all, however, this figure must make more of an
impression on the comprehension, and at the same time,
convince the audience.122
Forkel supports the concept of divisio as a distinct section
in the rhetorical dispositio scheme, when he refers to that
segment immediately following the thematic complex as "die
Zergliederung."'23Significantly, he characterizes the process
employed in this section as "the individualization of general
affections,"124 by which phrase he stresses not only the
still current concept of the principal thema as the general
expression of an affect, but also the dialectical procedure
of specialization or particularization of the general thesis.
Now that the more general aspects of the confutatio,
sequential amplification and thematic fragmentation, have
been discussed at some length, it is necessary to examine
the specific methods of argumentation which Schmidt
applies to this section and their musical application in fugue.
As an important preliminary step in this more detailed
study, Mattheson's definition of confutatio should prove
highly enlightening:
Die Confutatio ist eine Auflosung der Einwiirffe, und
mag in der Melodie entweder durch Bindungen, oder auch
durch Anfiihrung und Wiederlegung fremdscheinender
Falle ausgedruckt werden: Denn eben durch dergleichen
Gegensatze, wenn sie wol gehoben sind, wird das Gehor
in seiner Lust gestarcket, und alles, was demselben in
Dissonantzen und Rtickungen zu wieder lauffen m6gte,
geschlichtet und aufgel6set.
The confutatio is a resolution of the objections and
may be expressed in music either through suspensions or
also through the introduction and refutation of strangeseeming passages. For it is just by means of these elements
of opposition, provided that they are deliberately rendered
prominent, that the delight of the ear is strengthened and
everything in the nature of dissonances and syncopations
which may strike the ear is settled and resolved.125
84

The rhetorical purpose of the confutatio is to refute objections to the principal thesis of the argument; the musical
purpose is to resolve opposition to the thema. According
to Mattheson, this opposition generally takes three forms.
The first, the clashing dissonance resulting from suspension
figures, involves vertical harmonic contraposition; the second,
the jolt resulting from the rhythmic displacement by syncopation, involves vertical rhythmic contraposition; and the
third, the introduction of foreign sounding passages, is a
horizontal sort of juxtaposition serving as a strong contrast
to the reiterated thema. In the first case, the resolution of
such opposition takes the form of the harmonic resolution
inherent in the suspension figure; in the second case, it takes
the form of the rhythmic resolution afforded by such structures as the cadence where the voices merge rhythmically on
a strong pulse; in the third case, although it is not stated
explicitly, such resolution consists in the eventual reappearance of the thema.
Mattheson's example of the confutatio employs the first
of these three procedures of opposition and resolution, and
at the same time furnishes a good example of thematic
fragmentation (see example 5). In a footnote, he refers to
this passage as a series of "opposing statements with their
resolutions called the confutatio, the dissolutio by rhetoricians, the resolutio by us musicians."'26 Here, the elements

of opposition are represented by a series of suspended
dissonant sevenths and fourths, and the refutation of this
musical opposition is achieved by various resolutions of these
dissonances, in every case to the consonant third.
It is significant that for Mattheson, the aspect of opposition completely dominates the musical confutatio. It should
be recalled that a contrario is the first of the four genera in
the subdivision of the amplificatio into the various methods
of argumentation in the chria. Of course, the element of
opposition is basic to the whole process of argumentation
and is by far the most important element in the fugal confutatio. Schmidt, it should be remembered, refers to oppositum
(a contrario) in the fugue somewhat cryptically as "the
varied inversion of the fugue," by which it would seem that
for him, the principal method for opposition in the fugue
85

,

00
oo

Example 5

1FL

i

-

t1-1

=-

I'r-

c

f-

^ -

~

~

'u

I

It

I

F
]iI

__.r

-Jt

I II
W

, ,-

11-I-

-,

rJ~.

v

~r

Example 6

GGF

i"0^

Da sagt

s_

.b

p
man zu

if

am

und Hand, kein
mit Mund

|,1

-r

doch wenn
nur ge-wandt,
der Ri-cken

~/

r

ist

Pr

Wor
s

X
'

scho

consists in the various types of musical inversion. This brings
to mind immediately the close analogy drawn between
the musical processes of melodic and contrapuntal inversion and the various rhetorical figures involving the inversion
of word order such as hypallage, antistrophe, and antimetabole in early seventeenth-century musical-rhetorical sources.
As will be seen from the following discussions of musical
opposition by eighteenth-century theorists, inversion was
still one of the most powerful methods of musical opposition, and new aspects of musical-rhetorical opposition were
also emerging at this time.
Early in the century, Brossard's definition of opposition,
like Mattheson's later discussion, stresses the element of
vertical juxtaposition to produce harsh dissonances, above
all at cadences:
OPPOSITIONE ou OPPOSIZIONE. veut dire, OPPOSITION. C'est lorsqu'on met quelque chose aupres d'un
autre, quoyque ce ne soit pas naturellement sa place, cela
arrive souvent, sur tout dans la preparation des cadences,
ou l'on met par opposition la 6. ainsi6.
Oppositione or opposizione means opposition. It is when
one places something against another although this is not
naturally its place. This often occurs above all in the
preparation of cadences where one places by opposition
the 6th thus 6.27

Moritz Vogt (1669-1730) defines antitheton (contrapositum), a more specific type of opposition in which contraries are contrasted by juxtaposition, as "opposition such
as that which occurs in subjects and countersubjects as well
as the opposition of dissonances."128 Vogt thus includes
the element of the vertical harmonic clash which Brossard
had discussed earlier, as well as the important aspect of
vertical thematic clash between subject and countersubject.
Johann Gottfried Walther (1684-1748) refers to the
same term as "a musical phrase through which those things
which are contrary and opposite to one another can be expressed,"129 but interestingly enough, he treats the term
antithesis more specifically as "proceeding from a clausula
formalis directly into a foreign passage,"130 a definition
87

which anticipates Mattheson's similar mention of "strange
seeming passages" as an element of opposition.
Mattheson, in his treatment of opposition as an articulating agent in music, contributes further insights into the
whole question of contraposition:
Gegensatze k6nnen auf verschiedene Weise im Gesange
ausgedruckt werden, es sey durch gewisse Klange, die
ihren Gang umkehren; durch Intervalle, die einander
zuwieder lauffen, durch plotzliche Veranderung der
Tonart, des Tacts etc. Zur Vermeidung der Weitlauffigkeit wollen wir nur von der ersten Gegenbewegung eine
Probe geben [Example 6].
Opposites can be expressed in music in various ways,
be it through certain notes which invert their motion,
through intervals which run against one another, through
sudden changes of key, of tactus, etc. To avoid running
on at too great length, we will give a sample only of the
first, contrary motion131 [Example 6].
Mattheson's musical example offers graphic proof of the
powerful impact of the element of opposition which is given
first place in his discussion, contrary motion by melodic
inversion. The text, expressing the contradictory nature of
hypocrisy, is divided into two parallel opposite phrases, the
second a strict inversion of the melody of the first. Mattheson then mentions the aspects of dissonance, and that of a
sudden key change which recalls the conflicting relationship
between dux and comes discussed above. A related element
of opposition is the sudden change of time signature, a facet
of opposition not dealt with by any other theorist but
obviously one of great significance for such genres as the
canzona.
Meinrad Spiess (1683-1751) takes three elements into
account in his discussion of musical opposition:
Antithesis, Contrapositio, Gegensatz geschiehet, wann
einem Themati das Contra-Thema;oder denen erwartenden
Consonantien die Dissonantien entgegengesetzt werden.
Wiederum so man aus einer Clausula formali gehling
hinweg- und in eine fremde gehet.
88

Antithesis, contrapositio, opposition occurs whenever
the contrathema is set in opposition against the thema,
or dissonances are set in opposition against anticipated
consonances. Again, it occurs when one leaves a clausula
formalis and enters into a foreign one.132
His treatment is obviously derivative of those of Walther
and Mattheson, but it is interesting that in his approach to
the opposition of dissonances, Spiess clearly introduces the
concept of the frustration or defeat of expectation as an
affective impact.
Scheibe gives a comprehensive discussion of opposition,
and significantly, its important application in fugue is
stressed:
Die VIIIte ist der Gegensatz (Antithesis.) Wenn man
einige Satze gegen einander stellet, um den Hauptsatz
dadurch desto deutlicher zu machen. Dieses geschiehet
vornehmlich in Fugen, da man dem Hauptsatze jederzeit
noch andere Satze entgegen setzet, um jenen desto besser
auszuftihren und zu erheben. Insonderheit aber geh6ret
zu dieser Figur, wenn man ganz fremde Satze erfindet,
die an sich selbst und einzeln genommen im geringsten
nicht mit dem Hauptsatze verbunden zu seyn scheinen.
The 8th figure is opposition (antithesis). When one
places subjects against one another in order to make the
principal subject that much clearer. This occurs especially
in fugues, where one constantly sets the principal subject
in opposition to still other subjects in order to better
clarify it and render it all the more prominent. This
figure, however, is especially suitable when one invents
completely foreign subjects which, taken by themselves
individually, seem to be not in the least related to the
principal subject.133
Scheibe is careful to distinguish between that type of opposition which arises whenever a different counterpoint is juxtaposed with the principal subject, and the particular case in
which the counter subject is really an alien principal subject
in its own right such as that which appears, for instance, in
a double fugue. He also stresses invertible counterpoint as
89

an element of opposition, a concept referred to only vaguely
by Schmidt, and by no other theorist, stating at the conclusion of his discussion that "this is the real basis of opposition."134

Much later, Forkel adds a further musical-rhetorical
dimension to the question of opposition:
Die Gegensatze sind in der Musik das, was in der eigentlichen Rede die Beyspiele sind, wodurch wir den Zuhorer
n6thigen, unsern Hauptsatz gleichsam eben so gegriindet
zu finden, als das angeftihrte ahnliche Beyspiel. Sie sind
in dieser Ricksicht eine Art von Beweisen. Bisweilen
werden sie mit dem Hauptsatze zugleich verbunden, wie
in Fugen

..

Opposites are to music what examples are to the real
oration, through which we compel the listener to find our
principal subject just as thoroughly grounded as the preceding similar example. They are in this respect a type of
proof. Sometimes they are bound together with the
principal subject as in fugues. . . .135
According to Forkel, elements of opposition serve to exemplify the thema and thus function as proofs by example.
There is a merging here of the first and third of the four
genera in the subdivision of the amplificatio of the chria,
oppositum and exemplum. The connection with logical
argument here is unmistakably clear.
An aspect of the process of opposition closely related to
Mattheson's mention of rhythmic opposition by syncopation
-and one not elaborated upon at all by music theorists in
this period-is contrary time (tempus contrarium). Marpurg
defines this term as "imitation on opposed or mixed parts
of the measure, imitatio per arsin et thesin or in contrario
tempore,"136 to refer to that type of imitation in which
one part begins on the strong downbeat and the other on the
weak upbeat. Marpurg'suse of the word "opposed" (widrig)
to describe the resultant rhythmic clash is testimony to the
strong opposition involved. It is also significant that the
passage from the fugue by J. S. Bach which Marpurgrefers
to as a "dispute," consists in imitatio per contrario tempore
(Example 7). Marpurganalyzes the above passage as follows:
90

Example 7

Der Alt hebet denselben darinnen in der Gegenbewegung
an, und ein Viertheil spater und also in Arsi folget der
Bass vermittelst der engen Nachahmung ein eben dieser
Bewegung. Der Diskant scheint auch gewillet seyn sich
in diesen Streit zu mischen. ..
The alto takes up the thema at that point in contrary
motion; and a quarter later, and therefore in arsi, the bass
follows in the same motion by means of close imitation.
The discant also seems to be willing to engage in this
dispute...

.

137

The dispute consists for Marpurgin the entry of the thema
in the bass on the weak beat a quarter note's duration after
the entry in the alto on the strong beat. Another factor
contributing to the intense opposition, in this case on the
larger scale of the entire fugue, may be the fact that both
entries present the thema inversa, thus opposing the prior
entries of the thema recta.
It is significant for this discussion that contrary time is
an integral part of musical-rhetorical amplification. For
climax (gradatio), one of the most important musicalrhetorical figures of augmentation, Walther gives the following definition:
Climax,

oder Gradatio,

..

(2 eine Notenfigur,

wenn

nemlich zwo Stimmen per Arsin & Thesin, d.i. auf- und
unterwerts gradatim Tertzenweise mit einander fortgehen.
Climax, or gradatio, ..

(2 a musical figure in which

two voices proceed with each other upwards and downwards by step in thirds per arsin et thesin.138
Having dealt at length with the first and most important
of the four basic procedures employed in the confutatio,
oppositum (a contrario), we will now move on to the second,
a comparato. This procedure numbers among its subtechniques similia, which Schmidt refers to as "the altered
notes of the propositio, according to value." In rhetoric,
this sort of varied repetition is called paranomasia (allusio),
a figure in which a word is repeated, making slight changes
or alterations to letters or syllables in that word, or adding
letters or syllables to or subtracting them from words.139
92

This is precisely the same as the musical procedure
adopted in fugue whereby the value of one or more notes
of the original theme is altered, or intervals between one or
more pairs of successive notes undergo a change. Although
he does not mention fugue specifically, Scheibe does devote
a lengthy discussion to paranomasia as a musical-rhetorical
element, defining it as follows:
Die VIte Figur, die Verstarkung. (Paranomasia) Diese
ist insgemein mit der vorhergehenden Figur, namlich mit
der Wiederholung, verbunden. Sie geschieht, wenn man
einen Satz, ein Wort oder ein Redensart, so schon da
gewesen, mit einem neuen, besondern und nachdriicklichen Zusatze wiederholet. .. . Es geschieht auch die
Wiederholung einiger wenigen Noten . . . mit noch ein-

mal so viel geltenden Noten.
The 6th figure, amplification (paranomasia). This is
commonly combined with the preceding figure, namely
with repetition, and occurs when one repeats a sentence,
word, or figure of speech which is already present, with a

new and especially with an expressive addition.

....

It

occurs also in the form of the repetition of some few notes
. . with notes of twice the value.'40

Scheibe translates paranomasia as "amplification" ("Verstarkung"). In so doing, he gives the name of the entire
section (amplificatio) of the chriistic dispositio scheme for
one of the subtechniques of the second procedure employed
in this section. According to rhetoricians, paranomasia was
most effective when the new word which resulted from the
alteration, addition or subtraction of letters or syllables was
contrary in meaning to its model.'41 Is there any indication
in musical sources that we are dealing with yet another
aspect of fugal opposition here?
In answer to this question, it is interesting that Scheibe
includes the technique of strict augmentation at the conclusion of his definition of paranomasia. Forkel adds diminution in his definition of the same term, referring to it as
"an augmented or diminished statement."'42 In his letter,
Schmidt had referred to augmentation and diminution of
the thema as exempla which Forkel classifies as opposites
93

in his definition of opposition.143 The prevailing contemporary musical-rhetorical concept of augmentation in the
early eighteenth century would seem, then, to refute the
view that it acts as an element of opposition.
Another theorist who treats the technique of augmentation-diminution in musical-rhetorical terms is Vogt, who
defines diminution in terms of the rhetorical figure schematoides as follows:
Schematoides. Figura composita est, cum idem modulus
a voce una proportione longa, ab alia tardius incipiente
proportione brevi tandem confluit: ut exemplum est in
una nostra Missa ad tres choros [Example 8].
Schematoides. This is a composite figure. When the same
measure in one voice with long note values occurs later
in another voice with note values shorter than those in
the original, nevertheless there is a confluence of the two
as in the example from one of our masses for three choruses'44 [Example 8].
This is a fascinating musical-rhetorical application, for
schematoides is the Greek term for figura or modellum, a
formula or configuration similar to an architect's smallscale model from whose proportions the large-scalestructure
can be derived.'45 Diminution and augmentation had traditionally been closely bound up with the mensural element of
proportion, and Vogt stresses this facet in his definition.
This analogy is very close to that drawn by Schmidt between
augmentation and exemplum,.the third genus in the subdivision of the amplificatio, for exemplum carries with it the
connotation of a model set up as an object for imitation.
We come now to the penultimate section of the rhetorical
dispositio scheme, the confirmatio. Both Mattheson and
Forkel refer to it as a type of repetition of the thema "after
the preceding objections and doubts have been refuted."'46
In Schmidt's scheme, this affirmation of the thema takes
the form of "treating the subject in canon" or what is now
commonly called stretto. This piling up of entries of the
thema overlapping with one another has close parallels
with the procedure adopted by rhetoricians in the confirmatio, where the thesis or argument, by now established by
94

Example8

4:clI

VT

7

Ky- ri -e

e

rF

Ky-ri

Ad

.
'-j

w

u-nan

le -

-

-

4
i -son

e

pro -per

e-le-i

-

-

a

son

-

mus

)

l
;

W-

Ad u - nam pro-per--a-mus

me

I
U

me

refutation of counterarguments in the preceding confutatio,
is consolidated and confirmed by piling up and hammering
home that thesis by overlapping repetitions. The musical
counterpart in the fugue is stretto. Since it is in this section,
just prior to the conclusio, that augmentation and diminution most often occur, in conjunction with stretto of the
thema, it would seem that these techniques in fact were not
thought of as elements of opposition as suggested by Forkel,
but rather as affirming or confirming agents.
A general explanation for the spread of stretto from the
concluding section back into the confirmatio is that canonic
treatment of the thema represents a logical growth and evolution of the overall conclusion of the fugal structure, the
peroratio. Furthermore, early in the eighteenth century,
fugue seems to have been viewed in general structural terms
as a bipartite structure with an initial expository section
comprising all manner of figures of contrapuntal artifice and
a concluding canonic section. This concept is reflected in
Mattheson's general summation of the fugue as beginning
with "the figurae principales which then lead to the canones
in which one takes pains to bring the thema ever closer."147
However, there is a more technical rhetorical explanation
for the placement of stretto in a penultimate structural
position in the fugal-rhetorical disposition scheme. It should
be recalled that one of the four basic procedures included
under amplificatio by rhetoricians was the formal element of
ratiocinatio,l48

the process of logical reasoning which follows

the statement of the propositio (thema) and the questions
raised against it (confutatio.)149 The position of the ratiocinatio following the confutatio and in direct consequence
of it is clear. Since Berardi draws the analogy between the
close canonic imitation of the consequenza and the syllogism of logic, perhaps stretto of the thema was seen as a
strong formal argument to conclude the contentio complex,
where musical ratiocination, canonic treatment of the thema,
would constitute a powerful agent. This view is strongly
confirmed when one subjects the term stretto to strict
etymological scrutiny. Stretto is derived from the Latin
strictio (stringere) which refers to a particularly strict,
concise, bound style.150 More importantly, a closely related
96

term, constrictio (constringo), is an important logicalrhetorical figure. Significantly, Spiess applies this term to
the concluding stretto in fugue in his discussion of musicalrhetorical disposition:
In den Fugen.

. . wird die gr6ste Force mit vollstimmiger

Constringit-Repetit-und Imitirung des Thematis, Subjecti, &c. gebraucht zu Ende der Composition.
In fugues,.

. . the greatest power with full-voiced con-

strictio, repetitio, and imitatio of the thema, subjectum,
etc. is to be employed toward the end of the composition.l51

Of the three techniques named by Spiess, constrictio is the
most specific, and unambiguously rhetorical in its derivation. Constrictio refers to a binding together, a compression
or a bringing into narrow compass of the propositio, specifically in the section of the oration following the confutatio.'52
This definition offers close parallels with the use of stretto
in the fugal confirmatio.
Strict logical reasoning by syllogism (in music, the conseguenza or close canon), closely binds together statements
of the thema (propositio) in an overlapping series. This
theme has been refuted through various procedures involving
musical-rhetorical opposition in the preceding confutatio
and dismembered by thematic fragmentation. By means of
such a stretto, statements of the thema are compressed into
a narrow compass as far as time is concerned, and tied together into a tight knot. Spiess's application of constrictio
to stretto strongly supports Berardi's concept of canon as
strict logical reasoning in music, and clarifies its placement
in the confirmatio by close rhetorical parallel.
The final section of the rhetorical dispositio scheme is
the conclusio (peroratio), to which both Mattheson and
Forkel refer as "the ending or close of the piece,"'53 and for
both it involves repetition. Mattheson sees this as a type of
ritorello,l54 while Forkel refers to it as "the ultimate,
strongest repetition of such phrases as constitute, as it were,
a consequence of the preceding proofs, refutations, dissections and confirmations."'55 Both these theorists stress the
need for especially affective expression in this section,
97

according to Forkel "for the purpose of completely driving
home for the listeners the emotion aimed at in the piece
one last time."156

For Mattheson, this especially expressive

quality "consists not only in the flow or continuation of the
melody, but rather above all in an epilogue, whether it be a
fundamental note or a more intense accompaniment."157
These elements of the pedal note and harmonic intensity are
somewhat interdependent and entirely in keeping with both
Schmidt's and Sabbatini's'58concept.
The importance of the pedal point as a device employed
in the conclusio of the fugue is reinforced and amplified by
C. P. E. Bach (1714-88), who says of it:
Dieser letztere [Orgelpunkt] kommt gemeiniglich in
gearbeiteten Sachen, besonders in Fugen, am Ende ....
Im erstern Falle pflegen die Componisten fiber diesem
Orgelpunkt alle mogliche contrapunktische Kiinste gerne
in der Enge zusammen zu bringen.
This latter [pedal point] occurs most commonly in
strictly worked out things, especially in fugues at the
end. ...

In this case, composers are accustomed to bring

together every possible contrapuntal artifice, usually
tightly. 59

Strict contrapuntal artifice tightly woven over a pedal point,
above all at the end of fugues, would strongly suggest the use
of stretto. That the canon is even closer in the conclusio than
in the preceding confirmatio, as is here implied, would seem
to be confirmed by Schmidt's use of the term imitatio in
his reference to the conclusio. This is a freer species of
conseguenza or extremely close canon. The rhetorical
rationale behind this closest, strictest canonic treatment of
the thema may well lie in the rhetorical nature of the conclusio itself. It has already been pointed out above that
rhetorically, this sectionr is characterized by repetition of
the opening propositio, a logical consequent in the form of
an axiom or general truth, or a wish, commonly in the form
of a short verse, an aphorism. All of these elements can be
related on the musical level to close canonic treatment of
the thema. It goes without saying that the thema is repeated
at this point and the link between close canon and the
98

concept of logical consequent have already been dealt with
at length. An axiom is a law, and canon and law had for
a long time been closely linked one with the other.160 It
is also clear that musically, the canon was viewed in exactly the same way as the maxim or aphorism was poetically.161

We should be loath to part with what seems to us the
seemingly archaic, ostentatiously erudite Greek and Latin
terminology used by theorists and composers in connection with the fugue, for we find over and over that these
terms are rhetorical in origin, referring to specific, highly
enlightening rhetorical procedures. This terminology is
our only key to a close understanding of the early concept
of such genera as the fugue. These terms are not only rich
in meaning with their wealth of subtle nuance but are more
accurate in describing certain musical procedures than
translations or alternate terminology derived since. The
conglomeration of terms adapted by latter day theorists
from so-called "sonata form" and from purely abstract
compositional practices often obscure and even distort
the true nature of fugue rather than clarify it. A blatant
example of this state of affairs is the use of the word "episode" or "interlude" for the confutatio. Both these terms
carry the connotation of an incidental interpolation, a
break in the flow and action of the drama. This has nothing
whatsoever to do with fugue. There is no relaxation of
dramatic tension, no departure from the strict logic of
fugue in the confutatio, with its harsh and abrasive frictions and clashes created by various elements of musicalrhetorical opposition, its logical thematic analysis through
fragmentation, and its climactic intensification achieved
by the musical-rhetorical process of amplification, all to
be resolved by the eventual cadence and attendant climactic
entry of the thema. The word confutatio, with its specific
rhetorical implication of the refutation of opposing objections, is much more illustrative of what really occurs. And
so it is with the other musical-rhetorical terms employed
in connection with fugue. Current terminology stresses
contrapuntal compatability among the voices and mechanical
compositional procedures which leave the fugue bland
99

and lifeless instead of exciting and vital as it was in the
period during which it evolved as a musical structure of
central importance.
NOTES
* This article combines expanded and revised versions of two papers.
The second, dealing with the Baroque, was read before the National
Convention of the American Musicological Society in Washington,
D.C., November 2, 1974. The first, dealing with the Renaissance,
was read before the National Convention of the Canadian Association of Universities and Schools of Music in Edmonton, June 7,
1975.
1. The humanistic liberalization and expansion of the trivium to
include music, together with music's new role in this expanded
curriculum and its close relationship with the other subjects of the
trivium (dialectic, grammar, and rhetoric), are discussed at length by
Wilibald Gurlitt in his article, "Musik und Rhetorik," Helicon, V
(1944), pp. 67-86; repr. in Wilibald Gurlitt: Musikgeschichte und
Gegenwart, Beihefte zum Archiv fir Musikwissenschaft, I, 1, ed.
Hans-Heinrich Eggebrecht (Wiesbaden, 1966), pp. 63-81. Hans
Heinrich Unger attributes the growing influence of rhetoric on the
other arts, through the strong impulse of humanism, to the rise of
public educational institutions around 1500 (Die Beziehungen
zwischen Musik und Rhetorik im 16.-18. Jahrhundert [Wiirzburg,
1941, repr. Hildesheim, 1969], p. 13).
2. ". . . in poetica Musica nihil artificis est dignius quam fugas inserere.

3.
4.
5.
6.

Hac enim ornant cantum et musicam natura et arte instructum
referunt." (Praecepta musicae poeticae [MS treatise, 1564], mod. ed.
B. Engelke, Geschichtsbldtter fiir Stadt und Land Magdeburg, XLIX,
LX [1914, 1915], p. 242.)
See the author's "The Fantasia as Musical Image," The Musical
Quarterly, LX (1974), pp. 602-15.
The author is presently at work on a study of Stomius, his Salzburg
school of poetics with special emphasis on music instruction, and his
position as one of the earliest musica poetica theorists.
Prima ad musicen instructio (Augsburg, 1537), folio C 2 verso.
Lee A. Sonnino, A Handbook to Sixteenth Century Rhetoric (London, 1968), pp. 108-9. Sonnino puts great emphasis on those rhetorical figures which occur in English sources, supplementing and
amplifying these with other contemporary sixteenth-century European definitions as well as those from the classical treatises on
rhetoric. Thus her book offers an excellent compendium of definitions, and will be cited as a source whenever possible. In those cases
where a figure does not appear in Sonnino's list, or where a logical

100

7.

8.
9.
10.
11.
12.
13.
14.
15.
16.
17.

18.
19.
20.
21.
22.
23.

or grammatical structure comes under discussion, the original
source itself will be cited.
The entire treatise is printed from a manuscript in the Acts of the
Synod of Besancon of 1571, in Johann F. Schannat and Joseph
Hartzheim, eds., Concilia Germaniae (Cologne, 1759-75), VIII,
pp. 203-8. Claude Palisca first drew attention to this important
source in his article, "A Clarification of 'Musica Reservata' in Jean
Taisnier's 'Astrologiae'," Acta Musicologica, XXXI (1959), p. 150,
156. The author wishes to express his thanks to Professor Palisca
for making available a copy of his typescript of this treatise and for
his interest in the present study.
Anonymous of Besancon, De musica, p. 206b.
Sonnino, Handbook, pp. 103-4.
Ibid., p. 39.
Ibid., p. 64.
Ibid., pp. 167-68.
Ibid., p. 64.
Anonymous of Besancon, De musica, p. 207a.
"Quid est fuga? / Est duarum vel trium vel plurium vocum repetitio
quae fit vel per unisonum, 8, 5 vel 4." (Praecepta, p. 242.)
Ibid., p. 247.
In his transcription, Engelke suggests "prae se ferentibus" as an
orthographical correction for "praeseverantibus." In the context of
the passage, however, the original spelling is obviously the correct
one.
Ibid.
Cicero, De oratore, II, xvii, 72.
Quintilian translates emphasis into Latin as significatio. (Institutio
oratoria, IX, ii. 3.)
Sonnino, Handbook, pp. 200-1.
Prima . .. instructio, folio A 6 verso. Stomius here uses the term
in connection with the unnatural use of musica ficta.
"In quo omnes Harmoniae voces aliquam alicuius vocis in suo conjugio affectionem imitantur intervallis iisdem vel paribus." (Joachim
Burmeister, Musica poetica [Rostock, 1606], facs. ed., Martin
Ruhnke [Kassel, 1955], p. 57.) For discussions of Burmeister's
musical-rhetorical figures and his definitions, see Heinz Brandes,
Studien zur musikalischen Figurenlehre im 16. Jahrhundert (Berlin,
1935);Hans-Heinrich Unger, Die Beziehungen; Martin Ruhnke,
Joachim Burmeister, in Schriften der Landesinstitut fur Musikforschung Kiel, V (Kassel and Basel, 1955); Claude V. Palisca, "Ut
Oratoria Musica: The Rhetorical Basis of Musical Mannerism," in
The Meaning of Mannerism, ed. Franklin W. Robinson and Stephen G. Nichols, Jr. (Hanover, N.H., 1972). The last of these essays
is particularly interesting in that Palisca presents a thorough explanation of Burmeister's musical-rhetorical analysis of Orlando di
Lasso's In me transierunt, extending this analysis to include other
musical-rhetorical figures employed in the composition.

101

24. For uses of the term conjugium or its derivatives in its etymological
sense, see Cicero, Topica, iii, 12 and ix, 38, and Quintilian, Institutio, V, x, 85. This phrase is echoed later in Burmeister's definition
(e.g., "aptis & appositis concordibus conjugatis" and "aptae &
appositae sonorum conjugatae") (Burmeister, Musica poetica, p. 58).
25. "Unum pro multis examinari & perpendi, ac in usum transferri
potest." (Ibid., p. 57.)
26. Ibid., p. 58.
27. See below, p. 30.
28. Burmeister, Musica poetica, p. 72.
29. Ibid.
30. "Talis habitus Fugae, in quo duae Melodiae in Harmonia hinc inde
transsumuntur & in Fugam vertuntur." (Ibid., p. 58.)
31. Sonnino, Handbook, pp. 186-87.
32. Ibid.
33. "Quando Fuga converso intervallorum ordine introducitur." Burmeister, Musica poetica, p. 58.
34. Sonnino, Handbook, pp. 164-65.
35. For a discussion of this aspect, see n. 45 regarding the definition of
the synonymous musical-rhetorical figure, antistrophe.
36. "In fugam abrepta est." (Burmeister, Musica poetica, p. 59.)
37. "Est ornamentum, quod sonos similes per diversas aliquas, non
autem omnes, Harmoniae voces repetit. . . . "(Ibid., p. 65.)
38. For a discussion of this important rhetorical device, see Palisca,
"Ut Oratoria Musica," p. 45, and the author's unpublished doctoral
dissertation, The Canonic Sequence in Theory and Practice, A
musical-rhetorical study of its origins, and development in keyboard music to 1750 (University of Toronto, 1973), pp. 208-24.
39. Sonnino, Handbook, p. 205.
40. "Aliquam causam in una aliqua voce fit amputatio." (Burmeister,
Musica poetica, p. 59.)
41. Sonnino, Handbook, p. 161.
42. There is a steadily growing body of evidence attesting to the great
activity in the application of rhetorical figures to musical procedures by the English late in the sixteenth and early in the seventeenth centuries. That this evidence is just now coming to light is
due in large part to the fact that the close relationship between
rhetoric and music is largely pursued not in theoretical musical
sources, but in works dealing specifically with rhetoric. Claude
Palisca has already drawn attention to the importance of Francis
Bacon in this respect ("Ut Oratoria Musica," pp. 42, 45-46). However, there are other equally important figures as well, and the
application of rhetoric to music in England during this period
deserves more detailed examination.
43. The Compleat Gentleman (London, 1622), mod. ed. Virgil B. Heltzel(Ithaca, N.Y., 1962), p. 116.
44. A Plaine and Easie Introduction to Practicall Musicke (London,
1597), mod. ed. Alec Harmon (New York, 1952), p. 162.

102

45. Sonnino, Handbook, pp. 63-64. It is interesting that in later
seventeenth century English theoretical sources, the term "revert"
does, in fact, come to have a meaning which more closely parallels
the meaning of its rhetorical equivalent, antistrophe, that of retrogradation. See Christopher Simpson, A Compendium or Introduction to Practical Musick (London, 1667 ff.), p. 133, and Roger
North, "The Comon Caracters of Musick," Musicall Grammarian,
MS treatise, 1728, in Roger North on Music, trans. and ed. John
Wilson (London, 1959), p. 179.
46. Plaine . . .Introduction,p. 151.
47. The Principles of Musik, in Singing and Setting (Ecclesiastical and
Civil) (London, 1636), p. 72.
48. An Etymological Dictionary of the English Language, ed. Rev.
Walter W. Skeat (Oxford, 1958), p. 511. The etymological derivation is not from the word rapport, as suggested by Harmon in
Morley, Plaine . . . Introduction,

p. 151, fn. 1.

49. Harrap's Standard French and English Dictionary, ed. J. E. Mansion
(London, 1966), I, p. 732.
50. Memoires of Musick, MS treatise, 1728, in Roger North on Music,
p. 329.
51. Sonnino, Handbook, pp. 42-43. The English term "counterchange"
had long been associated with the rhetorical figure antimetabole.
See George Puttenham, The Arte of English Poesie (London, 1589),
p. 217.
52. Sonnino, Handbook, pp. 42-43.
53. Plaine. . .Introduction,p. 188.
54. Sylva sylvarum: or A naturall historie. In ten centuries (London,
1627), p. 38. This passage is quoted and discussed in general terms
by Palisca, "Ut Oratoria Musica," p. 45.
55. It is significant that almost thirty-five years before Bacon's application of traductio to fugue, in what appears to be the first instance
in which the name of a rhetorical figure is applied to a musical
procedure in an English source, Henry Peacham (the Elder) refers
to the same figure with regard to music. After giving a definition
of the figure, Peacham goes on to compare it to "pleasant repetitions and divisions in music" (The Garden of Eloquence [2nd ed.,
London, 1593], p. 49). This passage is quoted in Sonnino, Handbook, p. 179. Since any mention of music is completely absent in
the definition of the same figure, and indeed of any other figure
in the first edition of the same treatise in 1577, this might suggest
that the inception of musical-rhetorical application in England
dates from the 1580's.
56. Sonnino, Handbook, pp. 24-25.
57. Traite de l'Harmonie Universelle (Paris, 1627), p. 21. Mersenne in
fact views correct disposition as one of the principal considerations
in any definition of art itself (ibid., pp. 17-18).
58.

". .. ex figurarum artificioso

contextu

in Oratoria facultate

...."

(Musurgia universalis [Rome, 1650], I, p. 368.)

103

59. A Compendium, pp. 136-37.
60. "He [Bach] considered his parts as if they were persons who conversed together like a select company. If there were three, each
could sometimes be silent and listen to the others till it again had
something to the purpose to say. But, if in the midst of the most
interesting part of the discourse, some uncalled and importunate
strange notes suddenly rushed in and attempted to say a word, or
even a syllable only, without sense or vocation, Bach looked on
this as a great irregularity, and made his pupils comprehend that it
was never to be allowed." (Uber Johann Sebastian Bachs Leben,
Kunst und Kunstwerke, von J. N. Forkel [Leipzig, 1802], facs. ed.
J. M. Miiller-Blattau [Augsburg, 1925]; Eng. trans. The Bach
Reader, ed. Hans T. David and Arthur Mendel, rev. ed. [New York,
1966], p. 330.)
61. It is interesting that Anonymous of Besancon gives as his second
figure tone, for which the Latin equivalent is extensio (see Palisca,
"A Clarification of 'Musica Reservata'," p. 156, fn. 128). Anonymous of Besancon defines tone as the repetition of "the same notes
at equal intervals in different places" ("in diversorum locorum
spatiis aequalibus, voces easdem") (De musica, p. 207a). From this
definition, Palisca quite correctly equates tone with the figure
auxesis, a figure of amplification, and with sequential repetition.
Thus it seems that Mace views fugue in terms of the elaboration of
a theme by sequential treatment, a vitally important aspect of
fugue which will be dealt with at length later.
62. Musick's Monument (London, 1676, facs. ed. New York, [1966]),
p. 116.
63. Oxford English Dictionary, III, p. 458.
64. An Essay of Musicall Ayre, MS treatise, c. 171 5-20, in Roger North
on Music, p. 117.
65. Critica musica (Hamburg, 1722-25, facs. ed. Amsterdam, 1964), I,
p. 266.
66. Der vollkommene Capellmeister (Hamburg, 1739), facs. ed. Margarete Reimann (Kassell and Basel, 1954), p. 367.
67. Ibid., p. 337.
68. Ibid., p. 331.
69. Die Abhandlung von der Fuge (Berlin, 1753), I, p. 143.
70.

fra due, tre,
". . . rappresnta un vero, e reale combattimento
quattro, e piu Parti. . .. (Trattati sopra le Fughe Musicali [Venice,

1802], facs. ed. Giuseppe Vecchi [Bologna, 1969], p. 1.)
71. For a concise treatment of rhetorical disposition, see Sonnino,
Handbook, p. 243.
72. Dressier, Praecepta, pp. 243-48;Burmeister, Musica poetica, p. 58.
73. Burmeister, ibid.
74. It is significant that Burmeister closely links this section with the
"confirmatio of rhetoric" (see above, pp. 29-30).
75.

". ..

ce qui se rapporte

en quelque

facon

a une assemblee

de

quantit6 de gens, qui ayant raisonne les uns apres les autres sur

104

quelque sujet propose, viennent tous a une mesme conclusion."
(Traite de musique [Paris, 1656], p. 114.)
76.

". ..

la Logica, e Rettorica

[rendono

l'huomo]

atto a disputare."

(Arcani musicali [Bologna, 1690], p. 28.)
77. Ibid., p. 22.
78. Miscellanea musicale (Bologna, 1689), p. 204.
79. Ibid., p. 179.
80.

". . . la fuga deve esser tessuta stretta

...

"(Ibid.)

81. Ibid.
82. Documenti armonici (Bologna, 1687), p. 36. Mersenne had earlier
drawn a close comparison between the three terms (propositions)
of the syllogism (major, minor, conclusion), and the basic tripartite
disposition scheme. (Harmonie universelle, pp. 17-18.)
83. Le istitutioni harmoniche (Venice, 1558, facs. ed. New York,
[1965]), vol. 3, chap. 51. This close imitation can be either strict,
i.e., canonic (legata), or free (sciolta).
84. Schmidt preceded Johann David Heinichen as Capellmeister at
Dresden. Because of his conservative stand on certain musical
issues he aroused the critical ire of Mattheson. However, the two
are in relatively close accord in their approach to musical-rhetorical
disposition.
85. Published in Mattheson's Critica musica, II, pp. 267-68.
86. The author wishes to express his thanks to Professor George
Buelow of Rutgers University for drawing this aspect of Schmidt's
treatment of rhetorical disposition to his attention, for providing a
copy of the relevant portion of Weissenborn's treatise, and for his
instructive criticism of this aspect of the study.
87. Griindliche Einleitung zur Teutschen und Lateinischen Oratorie
und Poesie (Dresden and Leipzig, 1731), pp. 93-94.
88. Ibid., p. 92.
89. Sonnino, Handbook, p. 145.
90. Quintilian, Institutio, III, ix, 1.
91. For instance, in Mattheson's particular exposition of this scheme,
the confutatio precedes the confirmatio, the sequence fairly
standard at this time. Since Weissenborn gives as an alternate procedure for amplificatio a contrario, amplificatio per confutationem
(see Griindliche Einleitung, pp. 97-98), it seems clear that he is
equating the amplificatio and the confutatio as parallel sections.
This is confirmed by the appearance of the confirmatio following
the various methods of amplification and just prior to the conclusio in Schmidt's adaptation of the chria to fugue.
92. Ibid., p. 94.
93. Ibid.
94. It is clear that by this time, the introductory and preparatory function of the exordium was invariably the province of the preludial
composition which in most cases immediately precedes the fugue
proper, and that the narratio was considered as optional and more
often than not, dispensed with entirely. It should be noted, however,

105

that the exordium does figure, albeit infrequently, in the rhetorical structure of the fugue itself. Mattheson defines the musicalrhetorical exordium as follows:
Das Exordium is der Eingang und Anfang einer Melodie,
worin zugleich der Zweck und die gantze Absicht derselben
angezeiget werden muss, damit die Zuh6rer dazu vorbereitet,
und zur Aufmercksamkeit ermuntert werden.
The exordium is the introduction and beginning of a piece
in which the goal and the whole intention of this piece must
be revealed immediately in order that the audience may prepare itself for the piece and rouse itself to attentiveness.
(Der vollkommene Capellmeister, p. 236.)
95. ". . . la figura di Prologo, o Esordio della Fuga, par che dovrebbe
sempre con le sue poche Battute annunziare il Soggetto, o Sentimento della Fuga. . . . "(Trattati, p. 46.)
96. "Die Propositio oder der eigentliche Vortrag enthalt kurtzlich den
Der vollkommene
Inhalt oder Zweck der Klangrede ...."
Capellmeister, p. 236.
.. "(Trattati,
97. "Queste Fughe dunque propongono il soggetto.
p. 2.)
98.

". . . was bey einem Redner der Text oder Unterwurff

ist

..

"

101.
102.
103.

(Der vollkommene Capellmeister, p. 122.)
Ibid., pp. 122-23.
For a discussion of this process and its application to music, see
the author's "The Fantasia as Musical Image," cited above in n.3.
See above, p. 7.
Der vollkommene Capellmeister, p. 367.
Ibid., p. 378.

104.

". ..

99.
100.

sich hernach mit der Tonart wiederum vergleichen

lassen:

weil er gleichsam mit ihr in etwas zerfallen war." (Ibid., p. 383.)
105. In English theoretical sources of the period, the parallel musicalrhetorical term for the comes or answer is "retort" (see Roger
North, "Notes of Comparison between the Elder and Later
Musick and Somewhat Historicall of Both," MS treatise, c.1726,
in Roger North on Music, p. 290). The retort constitutes a sharp
or incisive reply, especially one by which the first speaker's
statement or argument is in some way turned against itself or is
met by some countercharge.
106. Dictionnaire de musique (Paris, 1703, facs. ed. Amsterdam,
1964).
107. ". .. was man sonst in fugirten Sachen den Wiederschlag nennet,
d. i. wenn ich einen gewissen Satz in andre Hohe oder Tiefe
versetze." (Der vollkommene Capellmeister, p. 124.) The term
repercussio has been used here to indicate entries of the thema
which follow immediately upon one another. This term had been
in common use among German theorists for well over a century
by the early eighteenth century and it is significant that the

106

origins of the term lie in rhetoric. Repercussio referred to a
specific type of repetition involving the sharp, hammered reiteration, especially of verbs with the same root (Quintilian,
Institutio, VI, iii, 78). The parallel English rhetorical term, report,
was applied in exactly the same way by North, who states that
"the point being once entered in the consort, the parts took it
one after another, and in different keys, which they call reporting ("The Comon Caracters of Musick," Musicall Grammarian,
Roger North on Music, p. 179).
108. Ibid. The same expression occurs in Quintilian, Institutio, IX,
iii, 45.
109. Under the figure synonymia, see Sonnino, Handbook, pp.1 16-17.
110. See Unger, Die Beziehungen, pp. 68-69.
111.

112.
113.
114.
115.

116.
117.

". ..

comprehensa

congeries,

quibus textus

velut variis Confir-

mationis Rhetoricae argumentis, animis insinuantur, ad sententiam clarius arripiendam & considerandam." (Musica poetica,
p. 72.) Burmeister's reference to the confirmatio section in the
same passage offers clear evidence that he is linking these two
distinct sections together in his medium to form a confutatioconfirmatio complex. Since the process of argumentation is
basic to both these sections, such an amalgamation is not out
of order.
The other three are incrementum (augmentation), comparatio
(comparison), and ratiocinatio (syllogistic reasoning). (Quintilian,
Institutio, VIII, iii, 90.)
Sonnino, Handbook, pp. 111-12, 56-57.
For a more comprehensive treatment of the relationship between
these figures of amplification and sequential repetition, see the
author's The Canonic Sequence in Theory and Practice, pp. 61-73.
According to Roman legend, it was resolved that a war raging
between Rome and Alba Longa during the reign of Tullius
Hostilius (672-640 B.c.) should be settled by a combat between
two sets of triplet brothers, the Roman Horatii and the Alban
Curiatii. Two of the Horatii were killed almost immediately but
the third, by pretending to flee, cleverly managed to separate the
pursuing Curiatii because of the differing degree of their wounds.
By so doing, he was able to dispatch them individually.
This legend was revived by Pierre Corneille in his play Horace
(1640), and this may well be the source of Bontempi's mythological allusion. At any rate, the close parallel between "the
prodigious feat of Horatio" and the fragmentation of a fugue
subject is clear.
Giovanni Andrea Bontempi, Historia musica (Perugia, 1695),
p. 252.
It is significant that in his discussion of fugue, Berardi refers to
"imitatione d'una particella" (Documenti armonici, p. 36), and
that Sabbatini terms this whole section of the fugue "imitazione"
(Trattati, p. 22).

107

118. Almost a century and a half earlier, Dressier had discussed the use
of membra in the medium sine fugis as a connective element.
(Praecepta, p. 245.)
119. Sonnino, Handbook, pp. 129-30.
120. Ibid., pp. 243, 244.
121. Der critische Musikus (Hamburg, 1745), pp. 692-93; see also
pp. 467-68.
122. Ibid., p. 393.
123. Allgemeine Geschichte der Musik (Leipzig, 1788-1801, facs. ed.
Graz, 1967), I, p. 51.
124. Ibid.
125. Der vollkommene Capellmeister, p. 236.
126.

". . . die

Gegensatze

mit

ihren

ein:

Auflosungen

confutatio,

rhetoribus dissolutio, nobis resolutio." (Ibid., p. 238, n. e.)
127. Dictionnaire, p. y.
128.

". ..

oppositio

tam fit in thematibus,

& contrathematibus,

quam

in oppositione dissonantiarum." (Conclavae thesauris magnae
artis musicae [Prague, 1719], p. 150.)
129.

". ..

ein musicalischer

Satz,

wodurch

solche

Sachen,

die ein-

ander contrair und entgegen sind, exprimirt werden sollen."
(Musikalisches Lexikon [Leipzig, 1732], facs. ed. Richard Schaal
[Kassel and Basel, 1953], p. 40.)
130.

". ..

aus einer Clausula formali, gehling in eine fremde...."

(Ibid.)
131. Der vollkommene Capellmeister, p. 188.
132. Tractatus musicus compositiorio-practicus
p. 155.
133. Der critische Musikus, p. 693.
134.

"...

dieser ist, der eigentliche

(Augsburg, 1745),

Grund des Gegensatzes.

.."

(Ibid., 395.)
135. Allgemeine Geschichte, I, p. 51.
136.

im widrigen oder vermischten
". . . Nachahmung
imitatio per arsin et thesin oder in contrario tempore.

137.
138.
139.
140.
141.

Abhandlung von der Fuge, p. 8.)
Ibid., p. 143; musical example, Ibid., TAB. XVII.
Musikalisches Lexikon, p. 172.
Sonnino, Handbook, pp. 26-27.
Der critische Musikus, pp. 691-92.
Sonnino, Handbook, pp. 26-27.

142.

". . . einem starkern oder verminderten

Tacttheile,
..."(Die

Vortrag

..."(Allge-

meine Geschichte, p. 57.)
143. Ibid., p. 51.
144. Conclavae thesauris, p. 151. Spiess's figure, diminutio, is purely
musical (Tractatus musicus, p. 156).
145. Sonnino, Handbook, p. 100. It is interesting in light of this concept of diminution as the proportional reduction of the dimensions of a given structure to form a model, and by extension, of
augmentation as the proportional enlargement of dimensions of a

108

model, that North sees fugue as "a sort of scheme or model to
work upon, and the contrivances are to protract that" (Roger
North on Music, p. 182).
146.

". . . nachdem

vorher

Einwendung

und

Zweifel

widerlegt

worden sind." (Der vollkommene Capellmeister, p. 53).
147.

". ..

148.
149.
150.
151.

in denen man die themata immer naher zu bringen beflissen ist."
(Critica musica, I, p. 267.)
See above, fn. 112.
Sonnino, Handbook, pp. 154-55.
Quintilian, Institutio, X, i, 77; XII, x, 52.
Tractatus musicus, p. 134.

152.

Figurae principales,

die fiihren hernach zu den Canonibus

". . . quae [ars logica] rem dissolutam

divulsamque

conglutinaret

et ratione quadam constringeret..."
(the art of logic binds
together a proposition which has been refuted and torn asunder,
and brings something into a narrow compass by reasoning).
(Cicero, De oratore, I, xlii, 188.)
153.

". . . der Ausgang
oder Beschluss
unsrer Klangrede..."
(Mattheson, Der vollkommene
Capellmeister, p. 236); ". ..

Schluss und Ausgang eines Tonstiicks..."
Geschichte, p. 53).
154. Der vollkommene Capellmeister, p. 236.
155.

". ..

die nochmalige

kraftigste

Wiederholung

der

(Forkel, Allgemeine
solcher Satze, die

gleichsam eine Folge von den vorhergegangenen Beweisen, Widerlegungen, Zergliederungen und Bekraftigungen sind .. ."
(Forkel, Allgemeine Geschichte, p. 53.)
156.

157.

158.
159.
160.
161.

". . .um dadurch den Zuh6rer zulezt noch ganz mit der durchs

Tonstiick abgezielten Empfindung zu durchdringen." (Ibid.)
"Und diese findet sich nicht allein im Lauffe oder Fortgange der
Melodie, sondern vornehmlich in dem Nachspiele, es sey im
Fundament, oder in einer starckern Begleitung." (Der vollkommene Capellmeister, p. 236.)
Trattati, p. 23.
Versuch fiber die wahre Art das Clavier zu spielen (Berlin, 1753),
facs. ed. Lothar Hoffmann-Erbrecht (Leipzig, 1969), pp. 181-82.
Walther, Musikalisches Lexikon, pp. 132-33.
At this time, it was a tradition for poets to inscribe witty aphorisms in guest albums. Musicians, contributed canons, usually in
enigmatic notation.

109

