Yale University Department of Music

Introduction to Neo-Riemannian Theory: A Survey and a Historical Perspective
Author(s): Richard Cohn
Source: Journal of Music Theory, Vol. 42, No. 2, Neo-Riemannian Theory (Autumn, 1998), pp.
167-180
Published by: Duke University Press on behalf of the Yale University Department of Music
Stable URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/843871
Accessed: 28/08/2009 16:38
Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of JSTOR's Terms and Conditions of Use, available at
http://www.jstor.org/page/info/about/policies/terms.jsp. JSTOR's Terms and Conditions of Use provides, in part, that unless
you have obtained prior permission, you may not download an entire issue of a journal or multiple copies of articles, and you
may use content in the JSTOR archive only for your personal, non-commercial use.
Please contact the publisher regarding any further use of this work. Publisher contact information may be obtained at
http://www.jstor.org/action/showPublisher?publisherCode=duke.
Each copy of any part of a JSTOR transmission must contain the same copyright notice that appears on the screen or printed
page of such transmission.
JSTOR is a not-for-profit organization founded in 1995 to build trusted digital archives for scholarship. We work with the
scholarly community to preserve their work and the materials they rely upon, and to build a common research platform that
promotes the discovery and use of these resources. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.

Duke University Press and Yale University Department of Music are collaborating with JSTOR to digitize,
preserve and extend access to Journal of Music Theory.

http://www.jstor.org

INTRODUCTION
NEO-RIEMANNIAN

TO
THEORY:

A SURVEY AND A
HISTORICAL PERSPECTIVE
Richard
Cohn

The papers collected in this issue representan emerging species of
transformational
theorydrawntogetherundertheNeo-Riemannian
designation. This introductory
essay sketches the origins and recent development of neo-Riemanniantheory,and positions it with respect to several
othergeneraof music theory,as well as to an evolving post-structuralist
criticalpractice.Along the way, it seeks to situateHugo Riemannamidst
the flurryof activity occuringbeneaththe bannerbearinghis name, and
to provide comfort to the perplexed observer who, innocently prying
apartthese covers and peering within, spies the theoreticaltraditionof
A. B. Marx and Oettingenrompingmerrily with that of Babbitt,Forte,
and Morris.Strangefellows indeed! ... or perhaps,upon reflection,not
so strange....
I
Neo-Riemannian theory arose in response to analytical problems
posed by chromaticmusic that is triadicbut not altogethertonally unified. Such characteristics primarilyidentifiedwith music of Wagner,
are
167

Liszt, and subsequentgenerations,but are also represented some pasby
sages from Mozart, Schubert,and other pre-1850 composers. Because
music of this type uses the harmonicstructuresand, often, the conventional cadences of diatonic tonality, it lures the attentionsof analytical
models designed for diatonicmusic. Yet it is also notoriouslyunresponsive to such attentions,a circumstancethatwas acknowledgedin the first
half of our centuryby Louis andThuille,A. EaglefieldHull, ErnstKurth,
Donald FrancisTovey, andAdele Katz, and has since been significantly
elaboratedin the writingsof Mitchell, Dahlhaus,and Proctor.'
The assignmentof a category-labelto the music thatconcernsus here
is delicate, largely for sociological reasons. 'Chromatictonality' misleadingly points towardpitch-centricity;'triadicchromaticism'is overinclusive, since it also embraceschromaticharmonyreconcilableto a diatonicbasis. 'Triadicatonality'potentiallymisleadsin a differentdirection.
When first introducedby Lowinsky (1961), with referenceto chromatic
from the turnof the seventeenthcentury,the conjunctionoxyrepertories
moronically grated on the sensibilities of readersfor whom 'atonality'
To
conjureda Second Viennese sound-world.2 defuse similarresistance
in the current
context,one feels compelledto inoculate 'atonal'with cowardquotes, andto stressthatthe presenceof consonanceno more implies
tonalitythanthe presenceof dissonanceimplies atonality.Underthe cirtermfor
cumstances, 'triadicpost-tonality'may be the more appropriate
the chromaticmusic of the late nineteenthcentury.Such is suggestedby
that
WilliamRothsteinwhen he writes,of Wagner, "Somephrases... are
not truephrasesat all from a tonalpoint of view because they do not containa single coherenttonalmotion.Suchphrases... mustbe saidto cross
the hazy line separatingtonality from post-tonality (or whatever one
wishes to call triadicbut post-tonalpractice)"(Rothstein1989, 280).
Two furtherpoints will help clarify the ways in which it is appropritriadic music as to some extent
ate to view some nineteenth-century
First,habitsof thought
tonally disunified,and,to thatextent, 'post-tonal.'
tend to obstructour ability to conceive of a composition as combining
segments that are coherently tonal with others that are not. One such
habit is the hypostasizationof the tonal/atonalbinaryat the level of the
composition (to say nothing of the composer and the entire repertory);
are
anotheris the convictionthatmasterworks unifiedby a single system.
these obstacles force us down a default path that leads from
Together
as
"thisphraseis difficultto understand an instanceof diatonictonality"
to "this entire composition is either lousy or atonal."Deconstructionof
both obstructivehabits,by now well underway,reveals alternatepaths.
A related point is that periodic Classical cadences do not guarantee
that the music framedby them is coherentlytonal. This perspectivewas
alreadyarticulatedin Fetis's 1844 Traitewith referenceto diatonic se168

quences,3and in this centuryit has been a tenet of GermanWagnerian
scholarshipsince Kurth.Its transmissionto American scholarship,via
Adomo and Dahlhaus,is manifest in the writingsof AnthonyNewcomb
(e.g., 1981, 52-54) andCarolynAbbate.For instance,Abbatewriteswith
referenceto Wotan'smonologue from Die Walkiire,
that:
Wagneriantonal analysis-which tends to take note of cadence
theirrelationships-might find 'progression'
or
points andextrapolate
'modulation'an adequatedescription,for both wordsarechargedwith
comfortablevalues; both imply that there is a coherentarc tracedby
the monologue'sharmoniccourse.Yetthe cadencepointsaredetached
from the musical matterthatthey punctuate:
they arenot integralto it.
It is as if these cadences are laid over unstructured
harmonicimprovisations;the cadencescreatelocal wrinkles,butonly drawa few instants
into theirtonal sphere(Abbate 1991, 192).
Abbate's characterizationsuggests a point of common ground between the emerging neo-Riemannianand post-structuralist
paradigms,
but also accents a point of dissonance between them. Both paradigms
recognize the potentialfor tonal disunityin music thatuses classical harmonies, and accordinglyresist shoehoring all chromatictriadicmusic
into the frameworkof diatonic tonality. For the post-structuralist,
the
recognition of tonal disunity leads immediatelyto an ascriptionof disunity tout court, andfrom thereto a clusterof cognate terms,chacuntout
court, thatring the post-structuralist
swimmingpool like so many chaise
'incoherent,''indeterminate','coloristic', 'dislounges: 'unstructured,'
or
junct', 'arbitrary', 'aimless'.
The recognitionof tonal disunitycould insteadlead to a question:"if
this music is not fully coherent accordingto the principles of diatonic
tonality,by what otherprinciplesmight it cohere?"The neo-Riemannian
response recuperatesa numberof concepts cultivated,often in isolation
of each other,by individualnineteenth-century
harmonictheorists.The
following exposition identifies six such concepts: triadic transformaor
tions, common-tonemaximization,voice-leadingparsimony,"mirror"
"dual"inversion,enharmonicequivalence,andthe "Tableof TonalRelations." With few exceptions, nineteenth-century
theorists incorporated
each of these concepts into a frameworkgovernedby some combination
of diatonic tonality,harmonicfunction, and dualism. Neo-Riemannian
theory stripsthese concepts of their tonally centric and dualistresidues,
integratesthem, and binds them within a frameworkalreadyerected for
the study of the atonalrepertoriesof our own century.

169

II
Neo-Riemannian
theoryoriginatesin David Lewin's transformational
to triadic relations.4In his 1982 essay, "A FormalTheory of
approach
GeneralizedTonal Functions,"Lewin proposes two classes of transformationswhich, althoughdefinedto act on "Riemannsystems"(a concept
thatwill not concernus here),indirectlyalso act on consonanttriads.One
invertsa triad,mappingmajorand minor triads
class of transformations
to each other.Examplesarethe inversionthatexchangesthe pitch classes
that form a perfect fifth (and hence maps a triadto its parallelmajoror
minor), and the inversion that exchanges the pitch classes that form a
majorthird(mappinga triadto its relativemajoror minor).Because the
inversional axis is defined in relation to the triad's component pitch
classes, ratherthan as a fixed point in pitch-class space, this class of
inversion."
is
transformations now referredby the term "contextual
is
The second class of transformations definedwith referenceto Figure 1, which (following Hauptmann
1853) arranges
pitch classes in a line
of alternatingminor and majorthirds,each contiguous tripletconstitutthat
ing a consonanttriad.Lewin proposes a set of transformations shift
triadsalong Figure 1 by a designatednumberof stations.Forexample,an
a
incrementalleftwardshift maps a triadto its submediant; leftwardshift
In
of two positions maps a triadto its subdominant. general,a shift by an
odd numberof elements invertsa triad;consequently,thereis some overand
between the shift transformations the contextual
lap, or redundancy,
becomes significantas the transformations
inversions.This circumstance
subsequentlyevolve.
of
Althoughfor heuristicreasonsthe characterizations the shift transformationsemployed here imply a motion in diatonic space, Lewin defines his transformations
generally so that they act analogously on conshifted along versions of Figure 1 constructedby alternating
figurations
dissonant intervals. Thus, although triads and diatonic collections are
proposedin the
amongthe objects thatthey produce,the transformations
1982 article are definitionallyand conceptuallyindependentof the system of diatonictonalitynormallysignifiedby those structures.
GeneralAs part of a broad explorationof musical transformations,
(Lewin 1987, 175-80) redeized Musical Intervalsand Transformations
introducedin the 1982 essay so that they act
fines the transformations
directly on consonanttriads(here referredto by Lewin, after Riemann,
is
as Klinge). A transformation conceived here as "somethingone does
to a Klang, to obtainanotherKlang"(177). Whathad been an incremental leftward shift on Figure 1 is now named MED, the operationthat
triadto "become the mediantof its MED-transcauses the transformed
form" (176). What had been a double leftward-shifton Figure 1 is now
170

bb Db f Ab c Eb g Bb d F a C e G b D f# A c# E g# B d
Figure 1
named DOM, and defined as transpositionby five semitones (T5). The
three contextual inversions from the 1982 paper are redefined and renamed,as follows:
We can define REL,the operationthattakes any Klanginto its relative
major/minor.... We can also definePAR,the operationthattakes any
Klang into its parallel major/minor.... We can define Riemann's
'leading-toneexchange' as an operationLT (Lewin 1987, 178).
in
Althoughthe transformations GMITremainconceptuallyindependent of diatonictonality,theirindependenceis not verifiedthereby constructionof analogousdissonantsystems as it was in Lewin 1982. Indeed,
the claim of independenceis somewhatoccluded here by Lewin's use of
informaldefinitionsthat,in the case of MED, REL, and PAR, imply the
mediationof diatonic collections.5These interventionsare heuristically
but
theirformalsuperfluity.
advantageous, the 1982 articledemonstrates
In additionto definingtriadictransformations, brief exposition in
the
GMITmarksout threeareasfor furtherexploration:
compositionallogic,
Lewin notes that two apgroup structure,and geometricrepresentation.
plications of MED compose to produceDOM, and that MED is a group
consistent with the
generator.Compositions of triadic transformations,
more general transformational
technology developed in GMIT,are representedas two-dimensionalgraphswhose elements are arranged hoc
ad
on the page.
BrianHyer's 1989 dissertation
develops these threeareas,substituting
a new graphingtechnique.Hyerextractsa subsetof Lewin's triadictransformations:three contextual inversions (PAR, REL, and LT) and one
each by its initial letteralone.The ap(DOM), representing
transposition
parentlydiatonicMED is eliminated,its job now dividedamongthe contextualinversions.This marksthe disappearance the shift transformaof
as
tions, the survivingDOM having been reinterpreted a transposition.
To chartthe compositionof these transformations,
a
Hyer recuperates
theorists, the "Tableof Tonal
geometry favored by nineteenth-century
The "table,"more accuratelya graph, coordiRelations,"or Tonnetz.6
nates threeaxes representing threetriadicintervals.On the versionof
the
the table presentedhere as Figure 2, perfect fifths generatethe horizontal axis, and majorand minorthirdsrespectivelygeneratethe two diagonal axes. Adjacentrow-pairscombine to replicatethe linear pitch-class
patternof Figure 1, but in a "fan-fold"pattern.The Tonnetzthus subsumes the geometryof Figure 1.
Each triangleon Figure 2 representsa consonanttriad.Arrows indi171

F#

////\

AE

D

Ab

Db

Fb

-

D#

G#

C#-

b

/\

F#

Gb

Db

C#

F

Bb

Eb

A#

C

Ab

Figure 2
as
cate Hyer's four transformations they act on a C-minortriad.Each of
the threecontextualinversionsinvertsa trianglearoundone of its edges,
mappingit into an edge-adjacenttriangle.P, for Parallel,invertsaround
a horizontal(perfectfifth)edge, mappingC minorto C major;R, for Relative, inverts arounda secondarydiagonal (majorthird)edge, mapping
invertsaround
C minor to Eb major;and L, for Leading-tone-exchange,
a main diagonal (minorthird)edge, mappingC minor to Ab major.The
fourth transformation,D (for dominant), transposes a triangle to the
triangle to its left, mapping C minor to F minor. (Note
vertex-adjacent
is
since it is producedby a compothat the D transformation redundant,
directions on the Tonnetz
sition of L followed by R.) Transformational
are invariant,althoughthe directionof the arrowis reversedwhen conthus provides
textualinversionsare appliedto majortriads.The Tonnetz
a canonicalgeometryfor modelling triadictransformations.
unlikethose of most nineThe objects andrelationsof Hyer's Tonnetz,
antecedents, are conceived as equally tempered, a cirteenth-century
neucumstancethatHyer acknowledgesby substitutingenharmonically
biased pitch-classnames favoredby
tral integersfor the enharmonically
the
Lewin (and used in Figure 2). Under equal temperament, horizontal
axis of Pythagoreanfifths becomes the circle of temperedfifths, and the
diagonalaxes of justly tunedthirdsbecome the circles of temperedmajor
and minor thirdsrespectively.The table becomes circularizedin each of
its dimensions, and the entire graphbecomes a hypertorus.Such a conwhich
of
ceptiongreatlyenrichesthe groupstructure the transformations,
Hyer explores in detail.
of
Hyer's appropriation the Tonnetzintensifies the relationshipbeharmonic
tween triadic transformational
theory and nineteenth-century
theory.Versions of the Tonnetzappearedin Germanharmonictreatises
172

the
throughout nineteenth-century,
beginningwith Weber's"Tableof the
Relationshipof Keys" from 1817-1821. If the objects in Weber'stable
are interpreted triadsratherthanas diatonictonal spaces, his table is a
as
rotatedgeometric dual of Figure 2. Like Hyer, Weberholds a cyclical
conceptionof the table's axes, noting (and graphicallyshowing) thatthe
axis of minorthirds"canbe bent into a circle of thirds,similarto the socalled circle of fifths."7

A table more closely resemblingFigure 2 is presentedin Arthurvon
Oettingen'sHarmoniesystemin dualer Entwickelung(1866). Oettingen
uses the table to chart relationshipsamong triads, anticipatingHyer in
this respect.Yet Oettingen'saxes, unlike Weber'sand Hyer's, are generated by purely tuned intervals,and thus extend infinitely without cyclic
closure. Riemann,inspiredby Oettingen,maintainedthe table in its infinite, non-cyclic formfor more thanfortyyears,despitehis evolving ideas
abouttuningandtemperament.8 is one of the odd ironiesof nineteenthIt
centuryharmonictheory that those theoristswho were interestedin the
table as a map of triadicmotion were not interestedin exploringits cyclic
and
propertiesunderequal temperament, those theoristswho were fully
comfortablewith equal temperamentwere not interestedin the table's
potential to map triadic motion. Throughthe presentistbias of current
neo-Riemannian
theoristshad at their
theory,it is as if nineteenth-century
disposal both flint and fuel, yet neverboth togetherat the same time.
Hyer's work fortifies the relationshipwith the harmonictheories of
OettingenandRiemannin yet anotherrespect.By eliminatingMED, and
thus limiting his transformations contextualinversionsand transposito
come into close contact with the system
tions, Hyer's transformations
of Schritte and Wechselintroducedin Oettingen 1866 and expandedin
Riemann'sSkizzeeiner Neuen Methodeder Harmonielehreof 1880. Alwith RiethoughLewin (1987) had identifiedhis triadictransformations
mann'swork,he had affiliatedthemwith the theoryof harmonicfunctions
introduced Riemannin the 1890s, while acknowledgingthatRiemann
by
did not conceive the functions in transformational
terms.9Klumpenhouwer (1994) notes the closer affinitybetween the triadictransformations andthe Schritt/Wechsel
(S/W) system,whichremaineddistinctfrom
the functionaltheoryintroduced decadelater.0 The affinitycan be speca
ified as follows: each species of Wechselis equivalentto a single species
of contextualinversion,to within enharmonicequivalence;the Schritte,
as a genus, are equivalent to the genus of triadic transpositions;each
species of Schrittwould be equivalentto a single species of triadictransposition (again to within enharmonicequivalence) were it not for Riemann'sdualism,which dictatesthatthe Schrittetransposemajortriadsby
the same intervalas, but in an opposite directionfrom, minortriads.This
are
dualistically imposed wrinkle aside, Hyer's four transformations a
subset of the S/W system.
173

The S/W system anticipatesthe triadictransformations Lewin and
of
Hyer in spiritas well as in substance,as is clarifiedin the recent dissertationsof David Kopp(1995, 112-21) andMichaelKevinMooney (1996,
236 ff.). ForRiemann,the S/W relationshipbetween two triadsis explictonal environment
(Kopp, 124), a characitly independentof a particular
teristicideally suitedto neo-Riemannian
analyticpurposes.Furthermore,
Mooney suggests thatthe S/W system, for both Oettingenand Riemann,
in
is essentially transformational just the sense that Lewin advances:a
given Schritt or Wechsel"is something one does to a Klang, to obtain
anotherKlang."'1
for
transforThe point of departure my own work in neo-Riemannian
mational theory (Cohn 1996, 1997) is the observationthat each of the
three contextual inversions of Lewin and Hyer feature parsimonious
voice-leading.Whenevera motion between two triadsinvolves retention
of two common tones, the single "moving"voice proceeds by step: by
semitone in the case of L and P, and by whole step in the case of R. This
circumstance permits extended triadic progressions consisting excluas
sively of single-voice motion by semitone,represented a motion along
of Figure 2. Cohn 1996 designates each
a southwest-to-northeast
alley
such alley as a hexatonicsystem. Figure 3 detachesthese alleys and prereflects
sents them as four circles, whose larger cyclical arrangement
The entire enthe adjacenciesof their respective alleys on the Tonnetz.
semble, termeda hyper-hexatonic
system by RobertCook, is essentially
Hyer's hypertoroidalTonnetz,arrangedso as to accent semitonalvoiceleading relationsamong the triads.A progressionwhose voice-leadingis
only slightly less parsimoniousis representedby motion along a northwest-to-southeastalley of Figure 2, as explored in Cohn 1997, where it
is called an octatonic system. Here single-voice semitonal motion (P)
alternateswith single-voice whole-step motion (R). The circularrepresentationsof these detachedalleys are presentedin Figure5 of Douthett
and Steinbach(see page 247 below).
The emphasis on common-tone preservationand semitonal voiceleading adds yet a furtherdimension to the relationshipbetween triadic
harmonic theory. Unlike their
and nineteenth-century
transformations
predecessors,for whom triadicproximitywas a funceighteenth-century
of
tion of consonance of root relation or, alternatively, root-relatedness
theoristsgaugedtriadicproxon a line of fifths,manynineteenth-century
imity by numberof sharedcommon tones, bringingto the fore exactly
the threecontextualinversionsexploredby Lewin and Hyer.The earliest
source I have located thatrepresentsthis new perspective,albeit only in
passing, is the 1827 treatiseof K. C. F. Krause([1827] 1911, 14). A more
comprehensivetreatmentis Adolf BernhardMarx's Die Lehre von der
MusikalischenKomposition,which first appearedin 1841 and remained
influentialthroughoutthe remainderof the century.Kopp discusses this
174

System
Figure 3. The Hyper-hexatonic
aspect of Marx's treatise in some depth, relating that Marx "neverdiscusses chord progressionsin terms of root relations. Chordconnection
for him is completely a matterof commontonesjoining neighboringharmonies" (Kopp 1995, 77). Marx also developed the concept of melodic
fluency, which essentially amounts to Schoenberg's"principleof least
motion,"and maintainedthat harmonicrelatednessand melodic fluency
of
competedon equaltermsas determinants harmonicprogression.Common-tone preservationand semitonalvoice-leading come furtherto the
fore in Carl FriedrichWeitzmann's1853 monographDer Ubermissige
Dreiklang, which views each consonant triad as a semitonal displacement of one of the four augmentedtriadsand classifies it accordingly.12
It is apparent,
from the foregoing discussion, that Riemannis not the
sole purveyorof those nineteenth-century
ideas thatareabsorbedby neoRiemanniantheory.Indeed, althoughRiemannis identifiedto some degree with the six concepts itemized at the end of the first part of this
essay, none of them originatedwith him. This circumstancesuggests that
the term 'neo-Riemannian' most pertinentlyviewed as synecdochally
is
the
appropriating name of Riemann,to representa traditionof German
harmonictheory which his writings culminatedand perpetuatedin the
twentiethcentury.
III
Nineteenth-centurymusic theorists had no apparentconception of
groups, sets, or graphs.(This is the case even for Helmholtz and Oettingen, whose primarytrainingwas in the physical sciences.) Nonetheless,
175

as the work assembledin this issue attests,these interrelated
branchesof
mathematicsprovidea productiveconceptualframework characterizfor
ideas aboutharmony,as well as an efficient
ing many nineteenth-century
and descriptive language for making and communicating
technology
new discoveries aboutthe propertiesof triadsand relatedstructures,
and
the relationalsystems in which they participate.
The centralcategoryof
harmonictheory,the consonanttriador Klang, is a species of the central
higher-level category of atonal pitch-class theory,the Tn/TnI set class;
Forte(1973) cataloguesit as the eleventhspecies of cardinality
three.The
most prominent transformations atonal pitch-class theory, transpoof
sition and inversion, are fundamentalto nineteenth-century
theory, the
the latterespecially as
formerdeeply embeddedin traditional
pedagogy,
dualism comes to the fore at mid-century.Enharmonicequivalenceand
crucialto the closure of pitch-class space, were recequal temperament,
theoristsbeginningwith Voglerand
ognized by manynineteenth-century
Weber,althoughstrenuouslyresisted by others. Common-tonerelations
among triads are associated with cardinalityof pitch-class intersection,
of
andmelodic fluencywith measurement directedintervalsin chromatic
both associations proceedingby simple translationinto a formal
space,
language.And graphtheoryprovidestechniquesfor formalizingandgeneralizing the relations that are portrayedin the Tonnetz.Although any
applicationof modem mathematicaltechniquesof inquiryand commuof
nicationto the repertory triadicpost-tonalityinvolves a certaindegree
the
of anachronistic
retrofitting, underlyingconcepts are consonantwith
those cultivatedin the nineteenthcentury,and indeed were broadlyexmusical thinkers.
ploredby contemporaneous
In 1990, I began to investigatethe position of consonanttriadswithin
what
the universeof modulo-12 set classes, in the hope of understanding
properties allow its members to participatein progressions featuring
parsimoniousvoice-leading.I discoveredthatonly a small handfulof set
classes could induce extended progressionsemploying exclusively single-voice semitonal motion (Cohn 1996, 16). The list interactedin interestingways with other significantfeaturesthathad been identifiedby
other explorers of the group-theoreticpropertiesof traditionalmusical
theoryrenewedthe contact
systems. In this way, triadictransformational
(alreadyimplicit in Lewin 1982) with an ongoing traditionof speculative
theory that traces its roots to Babbitt's identificationof the deep-scale
Following the methodpropertyof diatoniccollections (Babbitt 1965).13
ological lead of Balzano 1980, Clough and Douthett 1991, and others, I
set
then searchedfor "parsimonious classes" in chromaticuniverseswith
fewer than 12 pitch classes, in order to create a broaderplatformfrom
which to test and refine my observations.
In November of 1992 some preliminarydata, observations,conjectures, and a numberof open questions were sharedwith Jack Douthett
176

and John Clough. During the next six months, Douthett circulated a
series of letters, cumulativelysummingto approximately115 pages, in
which he sketcheda varietyof graph-and group-theoretic
approachesto
the problemsposed in my correspondence.
Douthettnot only formalized
and refinedmy observations,but also extended my interestin parsimonious triadic voice-leading to include relations between consonant and
augmentedtriads,and also between various species of diatonic seventh
chords.These inquiriesresultedin two geometricfiguresthatcame to be
known as Cube Dance and Power Towers, published here for the first
time as Figures9b and 10 of Douthettand Steinbach'spaper.The significantinfluenceof these figures,andthe workassociatedwith them,is evident in several papersincluded in this collection. Furthercirculationof
Douthett'sand my correspondence, JohnClough's initiative,led to the
at
formationof the first Buffalo symposium in July 1993. David Lewin's
of
presentation a generalalgorithmfor derivingparsimoniousset classes
became a focus of much of the 1993 meeting; it was eventuallyrevised
and expandedas "CohnFunctions"(Lewin 1996).
The eleven papersincludedin this issue continuealong the trajectory
markedout by the work that led to the 1993 Buffalo meeting. The first
five of these papersgeneralizeneo-Riemannian
methodology,applyingit
to set classes other than the consonanttriad.The firstthree papersshare
a focus on set class 4-27, the class of dominantand half-diminishedseventh chords.The atonalpropertiesof this set class had alreadybeen studied nearly thirtyyears ago by Boretz (1972). John Clough observed, in
correspondencefrom 1993, that set class 4-27, like the consonanttriad,
a
leads
minimallyperturbs symmetricdivision,andthatthis characteristic
to parsimoniousvoice-leading among its members.This observationinformsAdrianChilds'spaper,which identifiesa set of transformations
that
preserve two pitch classes and move the remaining two by semitone,
and
exploresthe systematicfoundationunderlyingthese transformations,
Edward
applies them to passages from Chopin,Wagner,and Stravinsky.
Gollin represents relationshipsamongmembersof set class 4-27 from
the
a slightly differentperspective,introducinga three-dimensional
Tonnetz,
and generalizingits constructional
that
procedureto createTonnetze portray common-tonerelationswithin less parsimonioustetrachord-classes
as well. And Stephen Soderberg probes the boundary between lateRomanticand atonalcompositionalpracticesby exploringthe properties
of hexachordsformed by uniting pairs of 4-27 tetrachords, part of a
as
broaderexplorationof hexachordalconstellations constitutedby welldefinedprinciplesof constructionfrom smallercells.
The status of the Mystic Chord(set class 6-34) as a minimal perturbation of a whole-tone collection forms a point of departure Clifton
for
Callender'sinvestigationof the parsimoniousvoice-leadingrelationsthat
interlinkthe harmonicand scalar structures
most characteristic Scriof
177

abin's idiom. In the final paperof this group, David Lewin explores the
orderingof [013] trichordsin a Bach fugue, chartingtheircommon-tone
relationson a Tonnetz
generatedby dissonantintervals.
In a wide-rangingpaperthatbridgesthe two halves of the volume,Jack
DouthettandPeterSteinbachexplorevoice-leadingparsimonyamongthe
basic harmonicstructures tonalmusic, as they relateto variousModes
of
of LimitedTransposition which they are subsets.Their approachsynof
thesizes work on consonant triads and 4-27 tetrachords,but also introducesaugmentedtriads,minor seventh chords, and fully-diminished
seventhchordsinto the parsimoniousmix. Readerswishing a brief introduction to the substanceof this volume may find it useful to begin by
studying Douthettand Steinbach'sgraphs,which are both synoptic and
transparent.
The finalfive papersextendthe focus on consonanttriadsthatinitiated
the neo-Riemannianenterprise.Carol Krumhanslreports on empirical
studiesof listenerjudgmentsof triadicproximity. geometricportrait
A
of
these dataindependently
and
Tonnetz, suggest
replicatethe hypertoroidal
that the four neo-Riemanniantransformationsemphasized in Hyer's
work are psychologically "real."She also finds that common-tonerelations are more likely to guide the judgmentsof subjectswithoutmusical
training,a finding that suggests some linkages with the changing constituencyof concert audiencesin the nineteenthcentury.My paperproposes bisecting the fourhexatonicsystems, creatingeight classes thatare
characterized the equivalenceof theirpitch-classsums, and modeling
by
voice-leading efficiency as the differences between those sums, using
music of Schubert,Liszt, and Brahmsfor illustration.
The final three papersfocus on compositionallogic and group structure within and among Riemann'sSchritt/Wechsel
neotransformations,
and
"twelve-toneoperRiemanniantriadictransformations, the standard
ations."John Clough explores the abstractpropertiesof the S/W group,
andcomparesit with the more familiartransposition/inversion
groupand
two othergroupsthatcombine S/W with T/I operations.Selecting one of
Clough's groups for closer study, JonathanKochavi's study focuses on
in
the pairingof transpositions Wechsel, the processfurnishinga genand
the
eral mathematicalbackdropagainst which to understand contextual
inversions emphasized by neo-Riemanniantheory. David Clampitt,focusing on a hexatonictriadicpassage from Wagner,comparesand interhexatonic transpositions,and pitch-class
relates triadictransformations,
inversion,andthen introducesthe conceptof system modulation,adapted
from Lewin 1987, to refine our understandingof triadic relations between distincthexatonic systems.

178

IV
The editors of this volume have been aware that the collaborative
natureof the workpresentedhere createsseveralpotentialpragmaticdifficulties for its readers.One problemis the profusionof termsthatcame
in and out of usage in various conversationsand informally circulated
documents.To take one egregious example, the individual cycles porto
trayedin Figure3 have been variouslyreferred as "hexatonicsystems,"
"maximallysmooth cycles," "P-cycles,""PI-cycles,""L/P cycles," and
"Cohn cycles." A related problem is the interchangeability symbolof
sets. Major and minor triads are distinguishedusing two conventional
pairs of symbol sets, plus/minusand large-case/small-case.The lack of
standard
names and symbols for dissonantchords,too, is reflectedin this
volume by a certaindegree of diffusion. Geometricfigures, such as the
Tonnetz,are orientedin differentways accordingthe objectives of individual contributors.Although the volume editors have recommended
some standards,
ultimatelyindividualauthorshave retainedautonomyin
these matters.The editorshave sought to clarify terminologicalambiguities whereverwe perceivedthem to arise.
between the
Finally,thereis a substantialdegree of cross-referencing
individualcontributions,
which precludesan ideal orderingof the papers
from the standpointof the reader.We have attemptedto point out linkages where we thinkthey are significant.

179

NOTES
1. Louis & Thuille 1913 (1982), 408-9; Hull 1914, 36; Rothfarb1991, 120-23
relevant
(whichtranslates
aspectsof Kurth1920);Katz, 1945, 210-15; Mitchell
1962;Dahlhaus1980 (1974), 64-71; andProctor1978.
2. See, for example,Fischer1972;Dahlhaus1990 (1968), 17-18.
3. Fetis 1844,25-26. His view influenced
see
Riemann; Dahlhaus1990 (1968), 59.
4. For a morethorough
accountof the development transformational
of
theory,see
Kopp1995,253-69.
5. See, for example,Kopp1995,254, whereLewin'stransformations characterare
I
ized (wrongly, believe)as "diatonically
at
predicated theircore."
6. Hyer'sversionis actually geometric
the
dualof theone provided
here,andits form
is more consistentwith the one providedin Lewin'scontribution this issue.
to
contribution. a
For
Geometricduals are discussedin Douthettand Steinbach's
in
of
see
morecompletecharacterization the Tonnetz, Gollin'scontribution this
issue.
of
7. Weber1846 (1817-21), 312. Fora recentTonnetz
table,
interpretation Weber's
see Lerdahl1994.
uses to whichRiemann thetableat differ8. Mooney1996discussesthevarious
put
of
views on tuning
See
ent pointsof his career. 146 ff. for a discussion Riemann's
of
andtheirimpacton his conception the table.
9. Lewin1987, 177.Thepointis echoedby Kopp1995andMooney1996.Alphonce
funcin
haveinterpreted
Riemann's
1988notesthatSwedishtheorists thiscentury
tion theorytransformationally.
of
statesthatthesystemis his ownextrapolation a sys10. Although
Klumpenhouwer
that
filledout by Riemann,
tem only partially
Kopp(1995, 118-21) demonstrates
filledout S/W system,whichKopprefersto
a
Riemann1880presents completed
of
On
as a "root-interval
independence the S/W andfuncsystem." theconceptual
tionalsystems,see Kopp, 181-84. An expositionof the S/W systemis provided
in
Gollin'scontribution this issue.
by Edward
sense is conveyedless
11.Mooney 1996, 71-77 and 236-39. This transformational
S/W systemis a way of classifyingrelastronglyby Kopp,for whomRiemann's
tionsbetweentriads.
classesarethetopicof Cohn2000, andarediscussed
12.Weitzmann's
brieflyon page
issue.
290 of the current
1997.The tradition
see
and
of
13.Fora summary assessment this tradition, Clampitt
maximal
includesGamer1967on deep scales,Boretz1971on asymmetric
partitioning,Clough1979andCloughandMyerson1985on the specialcharacteristics
1989on generated
of diatonicscales,CareyandClampitt
scales,Agmon 1991on
of
theuniquevoice-leading
space,
properties triadsandseventhchordsin diatonic
scales.
and Cloughand Douthett1991 on maximalevennessand hyperdiatonic
are
in
musicaltraditions
of
Similarinvestigations pitch-structures non-Western
and
Rahn 1977, Krumhansl
1987, and Clough,Douthett,Ramanathan Rowell
1993.

180

