Yale University Department of Music

"When You are a Beethoven": Kinds of Rules in Schenker's "Counterpoint"
Author(s): Joseph Dubiel and Schenker
Source: Journal of Music Theory, Vol. 34, No. 2 (Autumn, 1990), pp. 291-340
Published by: Duke University Press on behalf of the Yale University Department of Music
Stable URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/843840
Accessed: 16/12/2009 03:27
Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of JSTOR's Terms and Conditions of Use, available at
http://www.jstor.org/page/info/about/policies/terms.jsp. JSTOR's Terms and Conditions of Use provides, in part, that unless
you have obtained prior permission, you may not download an entire issue of a journal or multiple copies of articles, and you
may use content in the JSTOR archive only for your personal, non-commercial use.
Please contact the publisher regarding any further use of this work. Publisher contact information may be obtained at
http://www.jstor.org/action/showPublisher?publisherCode=duke.
Each copy of any part of a JSTOR transmission must contain the same copyright notice that appears on the screen or printed
page of such transmission.
JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide range of
content in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and facilitate new forms
of scholarship. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.

Duke University Press and Yale University Department of Music are collaborating with JSTOR to digitize,
preserve and extend access to Journal of Music Theory.

http://www.jstor.org

"WHEN YOU ARE A BEETHOVEN":
KINDS OF RULES IN SCHENKER'S
COUNTERPOINT

Joseph Dubiel
I
In writing a treatise on species counterpoint Schenker undertook
the uncharacteristic task of explaining how another theorist got
something right.1 This is not to say that the censorious impulse is
suppressed in his Counterpoint;for while he develops a set of contrapuntal rules virtually identical to those of Fux's Gradus ad Parnassum, he argues vigorously that Fux (and such successors as
Albrechtsberger, Cherubini, and Bellermann) utterly misunderstood
the relationship these rules bear to free composition. Schenker's
Counterpointmight therefore be taken to be about how species counterpoint could have managed to work even in the hands of those who
didn't know how it worked.
As is often the case with Schenker, his real quarrelseems to be not
so much with individual writers (however copiously the ones named
are quoted in a running point-by-point appendix to the text) as with
the world at large. Certainly it is no one in particular,but the musical
establishment im allgemeinen, whom he accuses of
the response-as fatuousas it is barbaric-with whichmanya teacher
dismisses his inquisitive students ... : "Yes, when you are a
Beethoven, you, too, may write that way." (I, 1)
291

-although not without a specific echo of Bruckner's "Segn's, mein'
Herrn, dass ist die Regl, i schreib' natirli not a so."2
Since this remark is objectionable from so many sides, it is interesting to see which one draws Schenker's first and most direct fire. A
teacher (hypothetical or otherwise) who makes it is charged with
"giving the impression that Beethoven had composed poorly!" (I,
1)-to which Schenker heatedly returns "No, it is a thousandfold lie:
Beethoven never composed poorly, and has no need of indulgence
from a teacher who is not able to hear" (I, 1). But who ever said that
Beethoven composed poorly-that is, when did anyone ever mean
such a brushoff to denigrate anything but the rules? (Presumably
Bruckner didn't.) Schenker's interpretation is of interest in that it
shows just how extreme are his ambitions for the rules of counterpoint: he intends them never to be suspended in free composition.
In light of this, it is surprisingto encounter another of Schenker's
many summaries of his predecessors' misprision: "This absolute and
invariable identification of counterpoint and theory of composition
must thus be considered the original and fundamental error that our
time has unfortunately inherited" (I, 2). Surely the Beethoven wisecrack at least acquits its maker of this. A moment ago, the cause for
complaintwas the idea that contrapuntalrules might sometimes cease
to apply, and now it is that the rules are too directly applied.
The resolution of this paradox must of course be that Schenker has
a novel account to give of the relation between contrapuntalrules and
compositional practice. And in fact, at the high point of his Introduction, his program for "ClearingUp the Misconception"3-which,
as a whole, is formed by reference to the second complaint, in that
"counterpointmust somehow be thoroughly separated from composition" (I, 10)-is subdividedinto two tasks: "(a) at the outset to draw
the boundaries between the pure theoryof voice leading andfree composition," and "(b) to reveal the connection betweencounterpoint...
and the actual work of art" (I, 10). "For," he continues,
there is indeed a relationship
between counterpointand composition,
althoughit is far frombeing one of completeidentity,and is therefore
completelydifferentfromwhathas been supposedby theoristsof both
the old and the new schools. (I, 10)
In a single word, Schenker's account of this relationship is
prolongation-which, as a single word, means no more than Schenker's compulsively repeated slogan Semper idem sed non eodem
modo (which makes its first appearance in Book I and heads every
division of Book II). It amounts to an insistence that apparent departures from the rules be understood somehow as extensions of
them-which is, among other things, a tactic for making the rules im292

mutable. That the theory behind this insistence is not entirely explicit, Schenker reports without discernible chagrin: "The new forces
that accompany free composition in music form an apparently new
order; yet those who have true understanding see the fundamental
contrapuntal principles profoundly and mystically at work in the
background" (I, 13). How "those who have true understanding"is
supposed to improve on "when you are a Beethoven" is not instantly
clear; to discover what Schenker means, it is necessary to read him
with a charity he habitually withheld from his colleagues.
He almost says so himself. After subdividing and elaborating the
first, boundary-drawingphase of his program for several pages, he
announces that "regardingthe second task, its execution in the course
of the work itself will most clearly reveal the method to be used" (I,
12). He thereupon adverts to an analogy with grammar:discussion of
a sentence from Faust whose elided subject and deviations from standard word order are explained by reference to "considerations of
verse (prosody, rhyme), and Faust's vexation ... also his zeal, which
makes that vexation truly credible," and are therefore said not to
"constitute an offense against German grammar,"but "only prolongations of the most ordinary grammaticallaws" (I, 13).
Incomplete and indirect as it may be, this is still a revealing description of prolongation. It reveals, first of all, that the kind of entity
that gets prolonged is a rule-which is to say that little in this book
supports the standardlatter-day application of the concept to pitches
and harmonies.4Only under this interpretation is it coherent, for example, for Schenker to speak of three-voice counterpoint as "merely
a prolonged phenomenon" in relation to two-voice counterpoint, or,
more specifically, of "the concept of triad ... evolved in the vertical
dimension of three-voice counterpoint" as a "prolongationof the law
of consonance" from two-voice counterpoint (II, 1-2).
Beyond this, it reveals something about the idea of grammar in
which the analogy is grounded. Schenker means grammar more or
less in the grammar-schoolsense: the organization of his exemplary
sentence stands in contrast to "the way that one would have to teach
a beginner to express the same thoughts" (I, 13), and it is this "grammar"that is prolonged rather than offended against. But if this is not
to amount to telling the linguistic beginner "When you are a Goethe,
you, too, may write that way," then Schenker must have some looser
set of constraints in mind as well, to delimit the range of what he
would accept as "prolonged"German; and these constraints are not
grammar, but something outside it. The considerations of verse and
character he invokes amount to "psychic compulsion toward freer
formations," such that "if we imagine these psychic forces to be absent, we see immediately that without them it would be childish,
293

indeed impossible, to use the same construction" (I, 13). You, too,
reamay write that way, then, if you have Goethe's extragrammatical
sons.
What is still unclear is how Schenker would distinguish between
ordinary grammar and prolonged grammar except very informally,
on the basis of intuitions about what is "normal," or perhaps even
observations of pedagogical practice. Neither the elision nor the reordering in Goethe's sentence is so unusual as to fall outside the
"common practice"of German. Fortunately it is not necessary to resolve this question in the domain of language; it is sufficient to be
alerted by it to the possibility of the parallel question arising in the
musical theory.5
The musical theory, that is, is likewise based on some idea of what
is "normal," in the sense of what will happen in the absence of unusual countervailingforces. Like the implicit linguistic theory, it thus
divides the phenomena within its domain into those which require
special explanation and those which do not. And although Counterpoint is ostensibly concerned primarilywith the normal-"it teaches
the most characteristiceffect of tones" (I, 14)-most of what it says
about the normal is defined by, and derives its interest from, the demonstrations it makes of these contrapuntal norms continuing to operate in music that is not bound by them.
The element of "effect" just mentioned (and not mentioned in the
linguistic sketch) is crucial to Schenker's thinking about these norms.
It appears again in a stronger statement with which Schenker advertises the contrapuntalenterprise:
In this study, the beginningartistlearnsthat tones, organizedin such
andsucha way, produceone particular
effect and none other, whether
he wishesit or not. One can predictthis effect: it mustfollow! (I, 14)
Thus where his version of grammar still more or less directly addresses the question of what to write (under normal circumstances),
his version of counterpoint addresses the question of what will (normally) happen-in the mind's ear of a qualified listener, presumably-when certain things are written. There must be a notion of
effect involved in the linguistic theory, too, though it is not made explicit (and, like the musical notion, it is easier to see at work in connection with prolonged than with ordinary grammar); and in any
case, the point is not to distinguishbetween the linguistic and musical
schemata on this basis, but only to use the comparison to uncover a
difference in the kinds of questions that systems of rules might address.
In line with this difference, two quite different kinds of statements
come to be thought of as rules. The first kind, for which grammar294

school rules provide the model, says to the student "Write(or do not
write) thus." It is the kind of law that Beethoven and Goethe are not
required to obey, and Schenker's intended reform of it is a restriction
of its scope to exercises, as distinct from artworks. The second kind,
for which scientificlaws (or "laws of nature")provide the model, says
to the student "If you do this, then such-and-such an effect will result." It is the kind of law that even Beethoven and Goethe were
bound to obey; indeed Schenker more than once implies that they are
geniuses precisely in that they obey such laws better than ordinary
people do.
Rules of the second kind do not ever directly tell anyone what to
write, although they may (or must) figure in decisions about what to
write. They might say "Scrambledword order produces an effect of
vexed utterance," but not "Scrambleyour word order" or even "Do
not scramble your word order." To yield decisions about what to
write, they must be combined with notions of purpose--as in "If the
effect of vexed utterance is what you want, then scramble the word
order (and if not, then don"t)."
Schenker is neither completely clear nor consistent about this distinction (nor are most other music theorists, which is what makes the
subject compelling);6 but still his effort to be clear about it-more
specifically, his basic (and brilliant) determination to frame the study
of counterpoint as a matter of the second kind of rule rather than the
first-is, as he realizes, the defining and distinguishingfeature of this
book. When he wavers, it seems to be because he cannot give up his
inclination to tell composers what to do. Since he is so committed in
general to the idea that great writing, literaryor musical, involves getting something right, he prefers whenever possible to represent the
purposes that turn one kind of law into the other as themselves "necessities." For instance, the study of a Chopin passage will make it
possible "to understandthe poetic reason and thus grasp the necessity
for" a peculiar exposed tritone (I, 57). And his pursuit of such necessities often entails a belief in rules of quite another kind.
II
An elaborate illustrationof the foregoing, accompanied by a cryptically suggestive methodological statement, may be found in Schenker's discussion of the Beethoven passage shown in Example 1. The
context is the prohibition of chromatic motion in the cantus firmus,
for three reasons: "the chromaticprogressionis . .. in a certain sense
... a kind of tone-repetition,"which retards the line; "the altered
tone [assumingthe first tone to be the diatonic one] . .. produces the
expression of a passing tone," which "ties all three tones together all
295

Beethoven, String Quartet Op. 50 No. 3, I
n.
Vl11

P

cresc.

f

b" ,

'

Example 1. (Book I, Example 35)
too closely as a unit"; and the juxtaposition of diatonic and altered
tones "has the detrimental effect of a 'mixture'of keys," which, with
its "drastic and forced character," can "in no way . . . enter into a

healthy and normal relationshipwithin the narrowscope of the cantus
firmus" (I, 46). The first two objections are, in effect, to the functional differentiation that would be introduced into the cantus firmus
by a tone that is a version of another tone-the disturbance of the
"equilibriumof the tones in relation to each other" (I, 18) which is
the fundamental premise of the cantus firmus. The third objection is
more complex; its point seems to be not the danger of grouping or
ranking the notes but the simple difficulty of expressing two keys
clearly without such differentiation (and within a very short span of
time). After illustrating all the forbidden possibilities with citations
from free composition, Schenker moves to close the matter-until, in
the Literaturiibersicht, catches Bellermann saying that cadences inhe
cluding the chromaticprogression of two forms of the seventh degree
"are entirely impossible and sound unpleasant even in free composition" (I, 50).
This draws Schenker out once again, to say that Beethoven can,
too, write that way-and even that he has to. Schenker explains the
passage as "an abbreviated version" of the succession shown in Example 2-three hypothetical forms of the motive that begins the Allegro vivace. Since on each of its first two occurrences this motive
initiates the Auskomponierungof a Stufe as a local tonic-first I, then
II-Schenker feels justified in reading its third occurrence as referring
to a IV Stufe not otherwise represented before V7 and I conclude the

Example 2. (Book I, Example 37)
Example 2. (Book I, Example 37)
296

progression.7The sense of the explanation, then, is that the "drastic
and forced" effect of mixture is acceptable in connection with the
comparablydrasticand forced treatment of the motive, and may even
help to clarify it. Therefore
Who can deny that Beethoven, in view of the particular
motivic circumstances,had the right, even the obligation,to compose the chromatic successionas daringlyas he did? (I, 51)
Beethoven's "right" (like Goethe's) comes from a situation to
which the extraordinaryeffect of what he has written is appropriate;
and his "obligation," if he indeed faces one, comes from essentially
the same source-the same situation, viewed as one to which this effect is necessary. About this obligation Schenker is not absolutely
clear: when he writes that "Beethoven underscored the motivic connection (which in itself really cannot be misunderstood) through its
harmonization" (I, 51), he appears to be toying with the idea that
such a motivic compression might not be recognized for what it is if
it were harmonized smoothly; and if he rejects the argument for this
particularcase, he nonetheless raises the possibility of its obtaining
sometimes. And he still refers several more times to the "necessity"
for the progression.
Perhaps the most interesting way to read Schenker is as saying not
that there would be no way to get through this moment in the piece
without a chromatic progression (there might or might not be), but
that this moment would not be what it is without a chromatic progression. What both readings have in common is the ascription of
some kind of function to the progression, be it the function of making
the passage go at all or the function of giving the passage some special
quality. And this function can then be invoked to explain (or even
justify) the progression-either to explain the progression absolutely,
if it is the only progression that would fulfill that function (which is
apparentlywhat Schenker hopes for), or, more likely, to explain the
progression up to a point, as belonging to a certain range of possible
progressions, any of which might fulfill that function.8
From this point of view, what is wrong with Bellermann, prior to
(and responsible for) his undesirable conclusion, is his apparent assumption that there could be no such function, so that the progression
will always be undesirable. This is to say the least: it is also possible
to read him as reasoning according to a different scheme which does
not include functions at all--a version of the grammar-schoolscheme
in which configurations are sorted into acceptable and unacceptable
and only the acceptable are employed. And it is predictably the
harsher reading that Schenker adopts.
297

At the climax of Schenker'sremonstrationwith Bellermann comes
this methodological maxim:
And how profitableit is when contrapuntal
doctrinetouches upon a
problemof effect only througha restrictioninsteadof a prescription!
All that remainsis to become awareof the reasonsthat reside in the
cantusfirmusin order to graspthe depth and breadthof the problem
outside its domainas well. (I, 51)
The first sentence is particularlyhard to understand, and it is helpful
to consult the original in the effort. "And how profitableit is" renders
"Und wieviel ist denn nicht auch schon damit gewonnen," clearing
away a swarm of Schenker's beloved "little words," more of which
hover around the "prescription":"auch nur mit einem Gebot"; and
the contrast between "restriction" and "prescription" is at once
starker-more like "proscription" versus "prescription"-and less
central to the sentence in "Verbot (statt Gebot)." Thus the sense of
the sentence includes something like "And how much is gained besides when contrapuntaldoctrine just touches on a problem of effect
with a proscription(instead of prescription)?"-where what is gained
is what the next sentence describes, namely, insight into situations
beyond those the rule governs.
In any case the firstsentence is unclear if its main point really is the
contrast between negative and positive legislation. For on one hand
it is easy to see how Schenker's Gebot could go in this case--"If you
want a forced and drastic effect, then write a chromatic progression"
(along with "In species counterpoint, you do not want such an effect"); and on the other hand it does not seem that Bellermann means
to advance the Gebot "Do write diatonic successions." Both writers
are thinking equally negatively, at least up to this point. The difference between them is in what they see their species-counterpointprohibitions as saying about the configurationsthey forbid: Bellermann
(as Schenker reads him) says nothing-beyond the rule is no-man'sland (or Beethovensland)-while Schenker (as he wishes to be read)
gives insight into "the depth and breadth of the problem outside its
domain."
III
The purpose of contrapuntaldoctrine is therefore in large part to
give information about what it rules out. It may also give information
about what it rules in, of course, but in Schenker's Counterpointone
is constantly struck by how much more is said about what is verboten
than what is geboten. To take the most obvious example, the discussion of cantus-firmuswriting in Book I fills nearly one hundred pages,
298

not because of the rules themselves, but because of the reasoning behind the rules and, most of all, the illustrationof this reasoning in the
analysis of musical passages that do not follow the rules. The rules
themselves do indeed tend to take the form of prohibitions, or lend
themselves to being understood as such. Some, such as the initial restriction to equal durationalvalues, could be formulated either way"Do write equal values" or "Do not write unequal values"-but the
force of the explanation is practically always negative-as, in this
case, "all rhythmic variety must . . . be avoided" so that "no note
enjoys any particular weight or preference" (I, 18). In general, the
intention behind the cantus-firmusrules is to "prevent groups of several tones from establishing . . . units based on rhythm or harmony"
(I, 17); although this intention can be stated positively as "we must
aim for a complete equilibrium of the tones in relation to one another" (I, 17), the positive statement is less accurate, less specificand ultimately less revealing about what happens in real music.
For it is not clear in principle how "complete equilibrium"could
be maintained in even the simplest tune-even in a descending scale
(which Schenker later settles on as systematically the simplest tune
there can be) a certain weight will attach to the beginning and ending
points, and a direct connection will obtain between them. And in
practice Schenker has no objection to internal differentiation within
the cantus firmus, provided that it does not (as per the negative statement) create groups among the notes. He even goes so far as to analyze Fux's "Dorian"cantus firmusas unfolding the D-minor triad, as
shown in Example 3, concluding that "Such unavoidable aggregates
. . . cannot and should not be subject to any restriction. The difficulty
lies, rather, only with smaller and more limited aggregates, which,
because they tend to form subunits, must be prohibited in all-but
also in only-those contexts in which . . . they become too sharply
defined as subunits within an otherwise prevailing condition of homogeneity" (I, 54).
Thus, once more, it is easier and more exact to say what the rules
are intended to prevent than what they are intended to secure. Exactness can be further promoted, however, by distinguishingamong
several rather different conditions grouped together under Schenker's rubric "units based on rhythm or harmony." For his purposes,
"rhythm"is taken care of by restriction to equal durations, as noted
tonic

eedl

third

fif.h
OriOa

0

n

ao

tonic

s

0

but
understandable
Dorian, in factalsoeasily
as
(Allegedly
simply D minor)

Example 3. (Book I, Example 40)
299

a moment ago. His concept of "harmony"begins with "successionsof
pitches that would protrude sharply as arpeggiationor figurationof a
single chord" (I, 19), though the associated example makes it clear
that objectionable figurationcan include neighboring motion about a
single pitch; and when the formation of units is subsequently invoked
against repetition of pitches and figures, and (leading up to the
Beethoven example) against chromatic progression, it seems that
"based on pitch" might have been a better thing to say. The sense in
which "harmony"still figures in the definition is roughly that all the
offending formations can too easily be heard as elaborations of one
thing or another, which thing is displaced in its entirety by some succeeding tone-so that succession within the unit and succession into
and out of the unit are significantly different; and this, surely, is an
extreme generalization, in terms of quality of movement, of what it
means to pass through a series of tones expressing a single entity such
as a harmony.9
The language about the D-minor cantus, however, suggests another emphasis-on separation at the boundaries of a group, rather
than connection within it. And this conception of the problem can be
generalized to cover configurationsin which notes are sharply separated even though no groups are formed, as for instance when a large
leap is followed by another large leap in the opposite direction: here
the objection cannot be to the formation of groups, since whatever
registral groups may be formed are not temporally contiguous, but
only to the sense that the middle note does not belong to the same
line as the notes before and after-is a "detour"(I, 91), as Schenker
puts it.
To summarize, perhaps a little from the standpoint of Schenker's
later theory, it might be possible to say that what is bad in a cantus
firmusis anything that removes it too far or too obviously from being
a single voice on a single structurallevel. All these principles may be
seen in play in Schenker's discussion of the freely composed melody
in Example 4, whose overt subject is the augmented fourth in the first
measure. The underlying lines are separated-"the melody ...
traverses the path from the tonic, B, to the subdominant, E" in a
passing motion-and "the eighth-note G" is subordinated to F# "in
the context of the large configurationthat grows out of the tonic scale
J.S. Bach, Massin B Minor,No. 1

Ky -ri-e

(B min.: 1

e - e -

-

i

03 IV

tII

Example 4. (Book I, Example 41)
300

-

son, Ky

OVII (-V)

- ri - e.

I)

degree" so that it "in reality produces more the effect of a 'passing'
tone (in the broader sense . . . ) than that of a tritone" (I, 55-56).
Departing even further from the perspective of Schenker's earliest
work, it might be possible to say that species counterpoint
teaches-by prohibition-what kind of musical configuration might
seem, right on the face of it, to be a prolongation (of something). The
prolongation's "effect" of being a prolongation is usually elaborated
much more than any "effect" of the configuration it prolongs. It is
along this line that being "awareof the reasons that reside in the cantus firmus"translates into understanding "the depth and breadth of
the problem outside its domain." The cantus-firmus rules thereby
take on some of the attributes of (extremely informal) "wellformedness" rules for "middleground" analytical representation;
though Schenker would not yet say any of this (and would never say
some of it), it seems clear enough when he offers Example 5a to illustrate "the precepts of melodic fluency ... at work" in a line which
represents "the most concealed result, the ultimate product of ascending and descending figurations"(I, 96) in Example 5b.10
Although this last example is precisely the sort that might be expected to fill a counterpoint book by Schenker, it is in fact almost a
unique one-in that it is intended to show a similaritybetween counterpoint and composition. Normally (to reemphasize the point of this
section) the examples are of dissimilarity.And the "effects"discussed
are mostly the effects of what species forbids (whence the unusual
nature of the example: "melodic fluency" is already an "effect," and
in this case the musicalityof the species-counterpointmodel has more
or less straightforward explanatory relevance). Therefore, once
again, the focus of discourse in Book I is perhaps not so much, or at
any rate not so directly, on what one might at first understandby "the
one particulareffect" of "tones, organized in such and such a way"that is, not on the effect of tones organized in the relatively simple
ways its rules allow-as it is on which ways of organizing tones might
demand to be understood as prolongations of simpler ways. One
might say that it directs attention to a particulardomain of effect2

b.l

J. rJr . i
U
8

9

4

3

10

5

Ir r.
11

12

frI~ 1 ~rir r 1 f
r
r

7

6

i
13

n 1S
r'
14

rIfr I!r

I
15

etc.

Example 5a. (Book I, Example 120)
301

dlr

L

I :_^: sL
^^H

+

13

X&M,S

{ -J
9'
1,^- ii]n-r

-

T~

172=

.

J.-j^jn-ippj r,
"rt
-f
_-

1

*

Example 5b. J. S. Bach, English Suite No. 6, Prelude, 1-15
"prolongedness" and "unprolongedness"-while saying comparatively little about the unprolonged itself.11
Though this emphasis, with the concomitant omissions, may make
for a degree of theoretical frustration, it is not at all objectionable
from the pedagogical point of view which was Schenker's. Fundamentally this Counterpoint,like its predecessors, is not devised to describe
anything, but to direct a course of activity meant to instill a working
302

awareness of something; and this is often important to keep in mind
when combing the text for evidence of Schenker's theory.
IV
To be more precise about the last observation, it may be helpful to
invoke the distinction Benjamin Boretz has drawnbetween attributive
and descriptivetheories in music.'2 For the kind of theory he calls
attributive, the use of the word "theory" at all may seem eccentric,
since an attributive theory "isn't descriptive or explanatory of anything; what it does is ascribe properties to and thereby determine
what there is." This theory is "the mental configuration" through
which some sounds are received and interpreted as music-the frame
of mind in which musical meaning is "read (or heard) into" the
sounds. A descriptive theory is a "verbalportrait"(or perhaps a portrait in some other symbolic system) of an attributivetheory or of the
result of an attributive theory's operation on a sequence of
sounds-to put it roughly, what is usually called a theory or an analysis. The point of extending the application of the term "theory" in
this way is to emphasize that every attribution of musical meaning to
a sound-every way of hearing-is contingent; there is no such thing
as "untheoretical"hearing. And the "degree of theoreticity" of any
way of hearing has nothing to do with the degree of articulationto
which the implicit theory can be brought.
Against this backdrop it is relatively simple to define Schenker's
mission, not only in Counterpointbut in all his work, as the attempt
to get his readers' attributive theories into shape-into what he regards as the only acceptable shape. Providing bits of descriptive theory here and there may be part of the process, but providing a
descriptive theory never is the process. To a considerable degree, the
appropriate attributive theory-that is, the appropriate frame of
mind for the ascription of musical meaning-is to be installed in the
pupil through exercises in composition limited to the configurations
fundamental to the attributive theory. By Schenker's account, as
noted above, Fux and others managed to make these exercises work
even while having inadequate descriptive theory to go with them; and
while Schenker does have more and better descriptivetheory to offer,
this theory is mostly about the construction of more elaborate meanings from the "primitive"meanings-it does not provide verbal renderings of the primitive meanings themselves.
It seems conceivable that Schenker might even have accepted at
least part of this account of his enterprise. For one thing, it is an account that makes some sense of the cranky argument that makes up
most of Counterpoint'stwo Prefaces. In the "Herculaneumand Pompeii of music" in which Book I notoriously sets itself, "all musical
303

culture is buried"-which means even that "the very tonal material
.

. is demolished." This "tonal material" is not the notes, exactly,

but "that foundation of music which artists, transcending the spare
clue provided by the overtone series, created anew in all respects
from within themselves" (I, xvii)--which is to say that the "material"
is a system of relations. This is even clearer in a stronger statement
from Book

II: "charlatans have . . . destroyed

the pure tonal

material-the art of voice leading and harmony-to such an extent
that it is no longer possible to achieve even mediocre results, such as
could at least have been attained in previous ages in regions below
that of genius" (II, xv-xvi). This is awfully exaggerated language just
for the observation that harmony and counterpoint teaching are off
track, unless these disciplines are recognized as representing the way
of hearing that, to Schenker's thinking, alone makes master-music
possible. No one, in short, has the right attributivetheory any more;
so not only can no one compose, but no one can perform or listen
either. And the social criticismto which the reader is treated for most
of the Prefaces is presented as a "brief and perfunctory"report of the
"causes"of the "decline." The issue is not the quality of the argument
(let alone of the social criticism), but Schenker's feeling that such an
argumentwas relevant and even necessary. The "demolition"of "the
tonal material" subsists just in "tones organized in such and such a
way"failing to produce the "effect" they "must produce"-failing as
they must in minds unconfiguredby the proper attributive theory.
In this light, Schenker's retort to "When you are a Beethoven"
might be understood as, in effect: Yes, Beethoven may (and does)
write anything he wants, because he hears whatever occurs to him
through the filter of the right attributive theory-which is to say, he
recognizes the "effect" it "must produce" and composes it out.
Beethoven's chromaticprogression is not ruled out because he "knew
enough" to hear it as a mixture of scales and set it so that it made
sense for it to be a mixture of scales. What would have constituted a
crime against "the tonal material"is failure to treat the progression as
such a mixture-by, for instance, employing it when there was no motivic support for a construal of it as involving two scales and drastically forcing their juxtaposition; this would have meant not noticing
its real effect.
Schenker's actual formulation has it that
In the best of cases-and this appliespreciselyto geniuses,and only to
them-intention (that is, predictionof effect) and effect correspond
but
of
perfectly; in the greatmajority casesthe tones, actingentirelyon
theirown and, so to speak, behindthe back of the composer,produce
an effect completelydifferentfrom that intended. (I, 14-15)
304

The image of notes having their own way is a consistent one in
Schenker's work, to the point where he sometimes seems actively to
minimize the role of choice in composition. To a degree he does this
even by presenting his analyses from background to foreground; for
his tendency then is, if possible, to represent the content of each layer
as motivated by the content of preceding layers. To take a very familiar example: Schenker can be counted on, practicallyevery time a
root progression of an ascending second arises in one of his analyses,
to speak of a "threat" of parallel fifths, which must be avoided by
some further contrapuntalelaboration such as 5-6-5. But what kind
of threat is there? Leaving aside the manifest unreality of the generative process in which the threat supposedly arises, there is still the
point that any fool can lead voices to avoid the fifths. And if the
threat is of structuralparallelism (which it usually is not, since the
most common configuration is probably a I Stufe followed by a distinctly subordinate altered II functioning as V of V), then a voiceleading fix won't work anyway. Almost always, it would make more
sense in such a case simply to say "the middle chord of the sequence
can be interpreted as prolonging the first one in a 5-6-5 progression
connecting it to the second"; but by fabricatinga motivation instead,
Schenker is able to achieve two things he likes very much: a depiction
of the composer doing what the material demands ratherthan making
a choice, and, along with this, a directly influential role for a contrapuntal rule.
This tendency to invent motivations is perhaps more remarkable
as the motivations become more ad hoc. For instance: in the analysis
of the Sarabandeof Bach's C-major cello suite,13the F of the octave
Urlinie and a trailing Terzzug turn up an octave above their primordial register. The explanation offered is not any form of "to account
for this passage of the piece, a registraltransfermust be invoked," let
alone "this passage has the effect of something pulled up out of the
register in which most of the piece's activity has occurred thus far;
therefore representing it as the result of a registral transfer will capture that much of how it sounds"; rather it is "This octave-coupling
fulfills the need of the instrument, which, like a human essence, likes
to manifest itself in its fullness: as long as enough is done for the Urlinie, why should the instrument not also permit itself such fulfillment?"14
This is to say, first, that the matter to be accounted for is not
the appropriatenessof the analytical assertion of an octave transfer,
let alone the appropriateness of the analytical system, but the compositional decision; and, second, that the way to account for such a
decision is to represent it as caused-rather than, say, as particularly
fantastic, or as likely to have interesting implications for what follows. It had to be done that way-if not because of the highest law of
305

the Ursatz, which could be satisfied otherwise, then because of some
need.

15

And, once more, the need is not created by the composer, but by
the material or by the medium. Even when the need is still more ad
hoc than in the last example-neither inherent in the tones nor inherent in the instrument, but essentially unique to one piecesomething of the kind must be so: when the C-minor Fugue from
Book I of the Well-TemperedClavier makes a habit of-indeed,
adopts as a rule-following each statement of its principal subject
with a descending scale in sixteenth-notes, Schenker insists that "Just
as unique as this fugue is, just so unique is the law that is its law of
life: the fugue itself gave birth to this law, not Bach-with the
strength of a genius, he only recognized it and submitted to it."16
From the point of view developed since the first section of this
essay, Schenker's thought slips its moorings here. He gives in completely to his unworthy wish to explain why his "masters"had to do
what they did. Surely what one would want to hear from him about,
say, the cello Sarabande example is that it is somehow desirable to
conceive of the notes in that passage as being lifted out of what would
otherwise have been their register; or, to put it a little more Schenker's way, the "effect" of "notes organized" as they are in that passage is that of a registral transfer; or, to put it a little more Boretz's
way, it is in some way advantageous to approach this passage with a
"mentalconfiguration"such that one would attributethe "quality"of
"an octave-higher-than-'normal'" to the passage. And in any case
the Urlinieis a (faintly cartoonish) representation of the set of norms
against which this perception might be attained, mixed with some
sense of the further connections, before and after, that might help
make this particularset of norms sustainable.
With this, one will have moved closer to an explanation of why
Bach wrote what he wrote only in that one will have developed a
more elaborate sense of what he wrote-or perhaps, in a more dashing formulation, whatwhat he wrote means (though not, please, what
he meant by it). That is, one will be in a position to read more
into-or hear more in-these measures than one could with a less
elaborate attributive theory, such as one which made it possible to
observe only that the passage is the highest in the movement, but not
that its "highness" is enhanced by its actually being something less
high transferredout of its "proper"place. (It is interesting that one's
sense of the cello cutting loose would be enhanced by the same token;
and, needless to say, the present comments on Schenker's logic take
nothing away from the pertinence of his musical observations.)
To be a little more precise about one of the last paragraph's assertions: the way this increased attributivepower might contribute to
306

an explanation of Bach's compositional decisions is by making it possible to imagine more in the way of function for what he wrote (in the
sense developed in the Beethoven discussion above). But "function,"
it must be kept in mind, does not have to mean (and in this context
generally does not mean) satisfaction of a necessity such that there
would be no piece if the necessity went unsatisfied;the only necessity
in sight is the one such that if it went unsatisfiedthen the piece would
not be what it is-where the richest possible sense of what the piece
is comes from a well-tuned attributive theory.
If there are "rules"or-it may as well be said-"laws" anywhere
in this picture, they should not be laws leading from one's general
notion of music down to the score produced by the genius under the
direction of those laws. If laws at all, they should be laws about what
sound-what "effect"-an arrangementof notes, appropriatelyinterpreted, will lead to; and such sounds will provide the imaginable basis
for compositorial choice of one arrangementor another, should there
be an interest in explaining such choices.
Why anyone would want to respond to a highly esteemed composition by telling a story of how it had to be exactly as it was is something of a mystery in any case-a mystery faintly suggestive of some
character defect in the storyteller. Wouldn't it be enough to say that
the piece is as it is, and that hearing it well means realizing how everything about it contributes in a variety of ways to a very full sense
of how it is (so that, incidentally, even a small change might make the
piece something significantly different-which is not necessarily to
say less good)? What of value would be lost under this less grandiose
explanatory program? The sense of the composer as inspired somnambulist, perhaps? But what is the value of that?17
To bring these questions back down to a real case: once the Beethoven string-quartet passage is parsed as motivic compression and
scalar mixture, what on earth is added by the claim that it is also compulsory? Even if it could somehow be discovered that Beethoven, at
this point, felt that he had no choice-that of all the possibilities he
could imagine, this was by far the best, or even that he could imagine
no others-this would still not mean that the composition would
collapse if a different move were made; it only means that if a different move were made, the composition would not be what it isand thus the discussion comes back again to giving the richest possible
description of exactly what composition this composition, under this
hearing, is.
The attraction of the idea of necessity probably derives from the
lingering on of the older idea about rules, the very one Schenker is
working so well to transcend. While the chromatic progression may
not be wrong in the pedant's sense, it is still not normal according to
307

the contrapuntal "Effektenlehre,"and so Beethoven would not have
written it "without a good reason." It is as though strict-contrapuntal
rules, even if they do not forbid things in free composition, may still
discourage things. Or, to be more precise-and to return to the sense
of some earlier speculations about this point-the rules bring it about
that some things a composer might choose will place special conditions on other choices. And with this the imagery of right and
wrong-and of right and wrong senses of right and wrong-may give
way just to the imagery of with and against the grain (of larger
norms).
This is still something to have--quite a bit, in fact. It is, in particular, what one might miss in a hypothetical "Schoenbergian"analysis
of the passage18which claimed that the quartet's wildly chromaticIntroduzione establishes a piece-specific norm, of which the moment in
the Allegro is a straightforwardreflection (as are the stringendomeasures sixth through fourth from the end of the movement, and many
choice spots in between). For surely one would want to perceive this
chromaticism as odd, and therefore as characteristicof a particular
and limited situation: if it is odd, then there is more meaning to the
exact timing of the Allegro's reference to it, just before the moment
when the new tempo, only hesitantly expressed for such a long time,
really takes hold-as if these measures were a last vestige of the Introduzione. Moreover, one would want to maintain some sort of
norms of harmonic and voice-leading progression even in the Introduzione in order to be able to recognize the progression from the
sixteenth measure to the seventeenth-from a dominant-seventhof F
(presumably minor) to a C-minor triad (tonic for the end of the
Introduzione)--as abnormal even by prevailing standards, so that
there is more meaning to the Allegro's abnormal treatment of V7 of
F, of all possible harmonies19-as if this moment still needed to be
thought over, even after the Introduzione's immediate function had
been discharged.
But none of this would have at all the point of making the chromatic progression necessary or right; it just makes it much. And insofar as one is concerned to appreciate a musical composition as a
human invention rather than as a quasi-naturalobject, this is altogether preferable. Herein lies the musical point of this essay's distinction between different types of law: Schenker is wise enough to reject
the image of the "masters"arrivingat their "masterworks"by obeying some supernal set of harmonic and contrapuntalrules, as well as
the vulgarly complementary image of their mystical antinomianism;
and though some substantial trace of this attitude may remain in his
idea of a naturalforce operating in the genius to dictate the course of
a composition, he is still able, much of the time, to address his laws
308

to the relation between what the composer writes and what a listener
can make of it using an attributivetheory adequately aligned with the
composer's. Alignment with the composer's attributive theory must
of course also be taken as a slightly confused conception of virtue for
listeners' attributive theories-that is, a roundabout way of referring
to a candidate theory's power to produce satisfyinglyrich and specific
hearings; but there is no serious difficulty in reading around this.
V
One of the great attractionsof Schenker's Counterpoint,in fact, is
the relative ease of reading it in the spirit just described. Book I in
particular owes everything to its felicitous and consistent refusal to
stick to its overt subject: even while Schenker promises to tell how
things are, his libido attaches much more to what happens when they
aren't that way (or to "knowing the reason why"). The pedagogical
significance of this peculiarity is hard to overstate; teaching species
counterpoint-or, better, teaching throughspecies counterpoint what
species counterpoint is a tool to teach-is a much more sensible operation when the effort to assert similarity between species and free
composition is placed in relation to the effort to affirm and articulate
the dissimilarity. The air of coverup, of "trust me," dissipates when
the teacher can say "Of course this isn't like real music: here's a piece
of real music that does what we've just ruled out-and here's how the
rule shows us a way into it." In the early stages of learning, nothing
speaks better for a theory than the possibility of showing its benefits
before all of it is assimilated; and it is in this respect, not just in respect of its clear organization and (for Schenker) relatively circumscribed metaphysics, that the Counterpointis Schenker's most nearly
"practical"success.20
This is not an idle commendation, or a peripheral one, for a pragmatic justification is the most appropriate kind for principles like
those of the Counterpoint.Schenker is emphatic about the point that
they cannot be justified by simple appeal to the music they are meant
to describe:
It is alwaysa seriousmistake,as I have statedrepeatedly,to call upon
the practiceof the mastersin free compositionto decide problemsin
strictcounterpoint.(I, 273)
That is, it is a mistake to settle contrapuntalquestions on the basis of
what is or is not found in compositions; the question is what the maintenance of a particularcontrapuntalprinciple will make it possible to
attribute to passages.
309

A fairly clear statement of this point comes through in an otherwise bizarre passage about how Bach repeatedly "misharmonizes"
the chorale "Gelobet seist du, Jesu Christ"in G major rather than C
major-evidently because he hears it as "Mixolydian"on G (starting
as well as ending on the mode's final).21In support of a C-majorreading Schenker advances three arguments: one that is "analytical"in
the familiar sense, essentially to the effect that the fourths and fifths
in the melody collectively imply C-G, defining the C triad, more than
G-D, defining the G triad (an argumentwhose acceptance requires a
strong preference for deciding on key as early as possible and maintaining that decision against increasing difficulty); one that is simply
hostile to the "churchmodes" (recalling-especially in its obsessiveness-the exasperating ??26-30 of Harmony); and, finally, the one of
interest here:
when a naturalsystem (in this case
Now, is it not an accomplishment
the major system) enables a melody to returnto its naturalkey and
even permitsit to appearin some respectsmore individualthan other
melodies belongingto the same system?(I, 39)
The argumentin question is expressed by only part of the quote-the
part, reminiscent of the methodological comments after the
Beethoven example, about how much more "individual"the melody
can be if it is construed by reference to a standard that is relatively
independent of what it does. The modal system, in contrast, though
"undoubtedlybased on good will and most detailed and faithful observation," yet remains "merely descriptive" (I, 39); that is, it does
not sufficiently interpretwhat it describes (and so tends toward the
same kind of error as does the wrong application of contrapuntaldoctrine).
The references to "nature,"meanwhile, may be understood as efforts to ward off a problem: if contrapuntal(or other) principles stand
or fall, not by whether what they describe is found in free composition, but "only" by how interesting particular compositions become
when interpreted by reference to them, then what is to stop a listener
from adopting utterly perverse principles-principles by reference to
which the ascription of the most extreme peculiarity to compositions
becomes "too easy"? Schenker does not ask this question, of course,
but much of what he writes can be understood as an effort to ward it
off. Accordingly, to recover it and criticize it in detail is unfeasible in
this essay, devoted as it is to other matters; but it is relevant to criticize at least the presumption that there is some criterion of "rightness" for attributive theories. For one thing, "rightness"is not an
issue-only richness of result is; which is incidentally to say that discourse between holders of contrasting attributive theories is not rel310

evantly directed toward ranking and possible correction of the
theories but toward exchange and exercise of them, to the end of giving both participants more options for how to listen. For another,
maintaininga disadvantageousattributivetheory is about as perfectly
victimless a crime as can be imagined (something which cannot so
easily be said about disadvantageousdescriptive theories), as well as,
in general, one with few attractions for the miscreant. And for yet
another, abandoningthe notion that a single best attributivetheory is
determinedby conditions outside the listener has nothing to do with
claiming that the choice of a theory is not affectedby such conditions;
as Boretz once put it, "I believe there's a real world out there, because not all of my fantasies work."22
It is tempting to say that the author of New Musical Theoriesand
Fantasies stakes everything on a real world going his way (in sharp
contrast to large sections of the world of appearances, especially the
social world); but it is fairer to him to say that he is confused, as he
clearly is in the quote about the chorale. Obviously his theory seemed
right to him because he preferred the experiences of music it allowed
him to have; and it is in any case unlikely that he had direct intuitive
contact with the natural realities that are purportedlyits basis. It may
be only that he could think of no better way to account for the operation of his attributive theory than to imagine it naturalistically:if
a particularconfigurationconstituted a relevant point of reference for
listening to a passage that departed from it, then the normal passage
had to have some kind of existence. It had to be somewhere, created
by something (the nature of sound, perhaps as this interacted with the
traits of a correctly ordered mind). And yet Schenker was happy to
acknowledge that the perception of this underlying "nature"did not
come naturally: "primitives"did not attain it to any appreciable degree (accordingto all the discussions of mode), only geniuses attained
it fully, and everyone in between had to be elaborately schooled to it.
He simply could not accept the idea that it might be in any important
respects contingent.
Fortunately this theory, too, is to be evaluated by what it does;
and two examples of Schenker'sepistemology in action, with traces of
its attendant psychology, are fascinating. The first is his analysis of a
few measures just before the "recapitulation"in the first movement
of Mozart's Linz Symphony-the most elaborate and protracted
analysis anywhere in Counterpoint. It presents a perceptual theory
whereby listeners pass through some sort of mental representation of
the norms to "arriveat" perception of the nonnormative music shown
in Example 6.
It is adduced as the first illustration of the way free composition
"justifies" successions of major thirds that strict counterpoint
311

Mozart Symphony No. 36, 1

i

r
i4 e

O_

(end of the Development)

I

1-,

Ei-i

.-

r
rr I,
r

-

o

%
(Reprise)

,.

rcL mlu m1

r FrrF
x'p

Example 6. (Book I, Example 200)
excludes (and, as the first illustration, suggests that scalar mixture
loomed larger in Schenker's mind than mi contrafa). On Schenker's
account the overriding V Stufe "demotes" these thirds "to the status
of merely transient chromatic advancements";but even so "the ear
grasps very well too the operation of the whole process that necessarily produced this effect of transience, and we gain finally the insight that we are dealing here with only apparent major thirds, which
in fact originate simply from minor thirds instead" (I, 148-49). This
process is explained with the aid of Example 7, which shows three
"interveningstages" through which "our perception . . . rushes with
lightning speed." The first stage is a diatonic passing motion in which
the middle two thirds, a-cl and b-d', are indeed minor. The second
stage is divided: one of its branches fills in the previous stage's upper
voice chromatically while leaving the lower voice unchanged, while
the other does the reverse. (Schenker labels all the chromatic notes

,

-'.

I

.

i

I

Example 7. (Book I, Example 201)
312

"passing," whether they precede their diatonic counterparts-as ab
does a-or follow them-as cf1 does cl.) The third stage combines
the branches of the second, so that every chromatic change now occurs against a sustained diatonic note in the other voice.
For Schenker, this hypothetical passage is real enough to call forth
a page of analysis-including blow-by-blow dramatizationlike "[the
upper voice] advances . .. while the lower voice ...

remains waiting

and passive" (I, 150) and a table correlating each diatonic tone with
its pair of chromatic partners (which is to say repeating the information of stages b and c). And although he then starts toward the music,
saying "it certainly amounts to exactly the same thing if the two
tones-the diatonic one and the chromatic one in each case-instead
of waiting and following upon one another, throw caution to the
winds and run together," the pull of his norms is strong enough to
elicit from him yet another description of stage c: "at the second quarter the third was indeed originally minor . .. until it was enlarged to
major . . . only by means of preempting the chromatic passing tone"
(both quotes I, 150). Finally "the ear . . . accepts the abbreviation
. . ., relinquishes the . .. minor thirds . . ., and thus arrives immediately at the perception of major thirds . . ." (I, 150).

The musical substance of this analysis is plausible enough; obviously the passage owes its snaky sound to its calculated disregard of
the diatonic norm, so laboriously portrayed by Schenker-to its opportunistic reproduction of major thirds, no matter what the going
scale has to offer. And this sound would be lost by an attributivetheory that simply accepted the parallel major thirds as a local norm
without maintaining a diatonic norm for it to conflict with. What is
remarkableis the just-so story about the psychological mechanism by
which the musical point is appreciated: to perceive the passage as an
"abbreviation"of something closer to the norm, the "ear"must pass
through ("with lightning speed") a representation of what is abbreviated. That is, the story is not just that the more normal, "explanatory" version is constructed somehow during the process of relating
the passage to the C-major scale; it is that this version is more readily
available than the music itself. There is nothing wrong with just-so
stories, of course: Boretz's story of an unarticulatedtheory is one, no
less than Schenker's of unheard notes, even if its lesser "naturalism"
makes it more plausible; and for present purposes it is a purely contingent matter which one is taken to explain better how an attribution
of snaky opportunism gets made. Thus, rather than read the passage
simply as an instance of fanciful psychologizing, one might better
read it as an instance of near-clarityabout the invocation of a reference outside the music to make the music more than it otherwise
would be.23 As suggested a moment ago, the interesting lapse of
313

clarityis not really about the cognitive process, but about the optional
nature of the whole business. Since Schenker is so determined that
this particular set of norms not be considered optional (and, very
probably, since he himself was unable to get on without them), he
finds himself inclined toward an image of them as psychologically inevitable (and perhaps even physically real), and toward an image of
contrapuntal(and other) teaching as the awakening of perceptions of
what is already there but unnoticed, rather than as the installation of
a system that might prove useful for a particularrepertory.
The second example tends the same way, but is less easy to read
as indulgently. It comes up during a spat with Riemann, in the discussion that follows Schenker's "Final codification" of the rules of
fourth species in two voices. Schenker is explaining that, while consonant preparation and dissonant suspension may represent the normal conditions for suspensions, free composition permits
"prolongations of the basic form" (I, 278) in which (among other
things) any element of the figure may take on a "harmoniccharacter"
different from the normal one (I, 280): the preparation may be dissonant, the resolution may be the seventh of a seventh chord, and so
on. He then asserts of the "double suspension a 5-:" that "it is not
permissible to speak of a sixth that has turned into a dissonance . . .
or of a 'make-believe consonance' (Scheinkonsonanz) as Riemann
does"; rather, "in the case of the sixth-suspensionwe must always be
content with just the feeling of suspension, at the same time allowing
the sixth to retain its fully consonant character"(I, 281).
Between "feeling" and "character"it may be difficult reliably to
locate sound-that is, it is not clear what hearing ought to go with
such a sixth-but Schenker's "effect," if it is what species counterpoint teaches, apparently is of consonance. Even if the Stufe that
would presumably be in effect when this situation arises in free composition makes it possible to "sense the consonant sixth-suspension,"
and indeed both suspensions, "more clearly" than in counterpoint (I,
281), still Schenker feels a line has to be drawn. If instead we were to
"draw the monstrous theoretical conclusion that culminates in the
proposition that just on account of increased clarity ... a sixth
should be counted as a dissonance," "wouldn'tit then be necessary to
treat all other consonances similarly, and to regard them as dissonances the moment they occur with the function of suspensions? For
example, in a case like the following: [Example 8]."
Schenker apparentlyprefers to believe about this example that the
twelfth c-gl, as a form of fifth, is unalterably consonant; and, therefore, that even in this context it consonates for all it's worth, although
its consonance is drowned out by the countervailing force of the I
314

Haydn, Piano Sonata Hob. 46, I

6

bbbb
'w-

FF

Ab major: I

IV

| _fflBrJ
(5

-

B;

V

j

6)

f L
ib I ^, IV-V .; F

ffl
I

Example 8. (Book I, Example 420)
Stufe.24To many readers, Riemann's contrarythoughts may not seem
"monstrous"at all:
Dissonanceis thereforecompletelygeneral:disturbance, foreignelby
ements, of the clarityof chordalmeaning. (I, 356)25
A chordrepresents
consonanceor dissonanceonly whenunderstood
in
its relationshipsto others-that is, in its logical context. We will discover, therefore, that it can be possible, or, rather,necessary,to understanda majoror a minortriad as a dissonance.(I, 281-82)26
The latter quotation even sounds like something Schenker would say,
if the issue were not the consonance or dissonance of a triad, but its
status as a Stufe or as passing. But Schenker wants none of it:
Isn't the thing we call a "relationship" truthmerelya mode of conin
(like "time"and "space"),and in no way an objectivereceptualizing
ality?But why should a "modeof thought"have such power over the
naturalphenomenonof consonanceas to alter its innermostnature?!
(I, 282)

Schenker's quarrel with Riemann is clearly not about musical
hearing, but about epistemology. It seems safe to assume that neither
party to the dispute would hear a consonant twelfth in Example 8,
that both parties believe that twelfths are normally consonant, and
that both have more or less the same reasons for hearing the g' in
question as the dissonant delay of ab1. But they are committed to different stories about how it is reasonable for this particular twelfth
to have its dissonant effect (different explanations of the effect).
315

Schenker is unshakably committed to an eternal consonant essence
for the interval, even though that essence has no effect in this case
(and there is reason to think he would be very hard on any theorist
who thought it did).
Indeed, it is possible to infer from this example that any "effect"
taught in species counterpoint might under the right conditions be
"prolonged" to the point of imperceptibility. And on the whole it
would seem wiser to regard the matter in a different way: to interpret
Schenker's primordial, essential, "it-must-follow"consonance as susceptibilityto the attribution of consonance, if the circumstances(notably the Stufengang) are such as to reward that attribution; and
therewith to interpret the study of species counterpoint not as the introduction of fundamental truths about "the tonal material," but as a
field in which to practice making attributions which, in Schenker's
(not ungrounded) opinion, it will be useful to be able to make consistently and fluently. The "inmost nature" of consonance is precisely
that it is a "mode of thought."
Since there is so much evidence that Schenker was close to being
able to say this, one wishes for some understandingof why he could
not quite manage it. And while the state of availabilityof better conceptual models is certainly a contributingissue (just as it is right now,
when the point must be made by way of unexpressed theories or incompletely accessible "mental representations"), it remains true that
Schenker himself was obviously capable of invention at this level.
Therefore it is inevitable to wonder how much the desire for an immutable basis for art-a set of "laws"after all, even if few in number
and linked to creation in an unfathomablycomplex way-might itself
have been the reason. (Is it not a demand for something immutable
that all the extramusicalcommentaryis trying to impress on us?)27To
put it another way, the impression can grow very strong that Schenker's Semperidem is not his summaryobservation, but his fundamental premise.
VI
In pursuit of a methodological point, the immediately preceding
discussion has seized on a particularnotion of "effect"-the kind of
which the consonance or dissonance of an interval is the exemplar.
Schenker probably had this kind uppermost in his mind when he described strict counterpoint as the study of effects; but if he did, it was
an oversimplification,for he also considers other effects of quite different kinds. The effects of the chromatic step are a case in point:
obviously they are not so well defined as the effect of consonance,
316

and Schenker's description accordingly only tries to give a sense of
the range and type of complexity that a chromatic step might entail
under various conditions (and that might constrain its use). On other
occasions his description concerns the position of a configuration
within his theoretical world, rather than its sound as such; for instance, his description of "the third" (in his "Specific observations
about the nature of the permissible intervals" in the cantus firmus)
reads in its entirety:
The thirdis of two types: the majorthird, whichis a consonanceborn
of nature, and the minorthird, which, on the contrary,is merelythe
artificial
of
counterpart the major.The thirdis includedin the content
of the triad and represents,so to speak, its internalorgans. (I, 81)
The first of these statements is unlikely to mean anything in compositorial practice, but only ties the intervals into the "natural"-and"artificial"system asserted in Harmony; while the second perhaps
specifies in its ghoulish way that the third does not determine a triad
the way the fifth does,28 but may be inferred (given a scale) from a
fifth.
Beyond all these is one more kind of effect which seems to be a still
"purer"attribution, which is to say one that is harder to imagine as
"forced"by the arrangementsof notes and yet-more remarkablyone that never goes away: the effect of being "passing."The sense in
which it never goes away is that a consonant chord brought into existence to harmonize a dissonant passing tone takes on the passing
nature of the tone, and retains it even under subsequent transformations that change its voicing and produce more chords in elaboration
of it; indeed "Schenker'stheory" as we know it can be construed as
an enormous extension of just this claim. Schenker can use the passing tone as the basis for his entire model of musical coherence precisely because he believes that the effect of "being passing"can never
be drowned out-not only never removed, that is (which is something
he believes of all his effects), but not even overridden the way the
consonant nature of the twelfth c-gl can be. When several lines
present passing tones together, forming consonant intervals between
them, Schenker will speak directly of "dissonant effects by means of
detours through consonant sounds" (II, 208). And ultimately the Ursatz, whatever else it may be, is an assertion that most of the events
of a piece, however protracted, stable, and locally well defined and
independent, are passing toward the final tonic.
To present and develop the concept of the passing tone, therefore,
is the single most important contribution Counterpoint makes to
Schenker's theory. It is the most radical and decisive contribution:in
the conceptual frame of this essay, the extended-the "prolonged"317

passing tone is Schenker's signal contributionto tonal attributivetheory. That is, a definition of "passing" character under which this
charactermay be attributed to a wide variety of musical phenomena
besides passing tones in the familiar sense is something essentially
new in Schenker's work; a "passingevent" in this extended sense is a
more or less new thing for events to be heard as-a new "thing for
things to be." Accordingly the final task for this examination of Counterpointis to examine this concept of passing note, to find out something about how this particulareffect comes by its distinction.
Presumably this distinction has something to do with Schenker's
choice of the passing tone as the model for all dissonance. His case for
it, in two-voice second species (I, 176-79), is essentially that it relates
no more closely to one of its flanking consonances than to the other
(as a dissonance approached or left by skip might seem to) and that,
in contrast to the neighboring tone, it at least has the significance of
keeping a line moving from consonance to consonance (rather than
the significance only of elaborating a stationary tone). An especially
interesting remark is that "the second used in this way . . . contributes just as little of harmony to the tone that follows as to the one that
precedes"-that is, "it relates to both just as a dissonance" (I, 178);
the implication is that if another tone is present, consonant with the
first tone and dissonant with the passing tone, then this sounding dissonance is not in principle very different from the dissonance already
attributed to the passing tone just in comparison with the preceding
tone in its own line. This opens the way to another thought, whose
formulation in Book I is cryptic: that even though the dissonance is
"the mark of an independence ... of the one voice in relation to the
other," still "the transient independence increases the value and
power of the unity of the two" (I, 184). In the section of Book II
about three-voice second species, a crucial addition is made:
It is preciselythe dissonantpassingtone that confirmsthe harmonyof
the downbeatmore reliablyand emphatically
than the consonantupbeat, which . . . does not implya unity of harmoniceffect [withinthe
bar]and often leads to a more or less explicitchangeof harmony.(II,
57)
Why "more reliably"?Because a dissonant passing tone, unable to
express a harmony, cannot change the harmony against the cantusfirmustone, and so leaves the listener to hold the downbeat harmony
in memory until another harmony comes along; whereas a consonant
upbeat, even when it continues the downbeat harmony, can express
this harmony adequately on its own, and so does not exact this mental
effort-does not force the listener to hold the downbeat harmony
318

(even if it also does not interfere). From this follows perhaps the most
consequential statement of the entire work:
Alongside all the corporeality . . . of the intervals available in strict

counterpoint,the first appearanceof the dissonantpassingtone produces a curiousintrusionof the imaginary: consistsin the covert reit
tention, by the ear, of the consonant point of departure that
accompaniesthe dissonantpassing tone on its journey through the
third-space.It is as though the dissonancewould alwayscarrywith it
the impression of its consonant origin. . . . (II, 57-58)

Here, apparently, is the passing tone's signal distinction. The "curious intrusion of the imaginary"lies in the fact that-unlike some of
the other "effects" discussed earlier-the effect of passing is in no
way an effect of the individual event, but necessarily an effect of the
event in relation to other events. ("Consonant nature," by contrast,
is precisely an effect of the individual interval; and it is through the
interval's relation to other events that its consonance can be overridden. Much the same could be said of an interval's power or lack of
power to determine a triad. For an effect like "forced and drasticmixture," the matter is more equivocal: this is not quite the same kind of
effect as these others, but is in some respect an effect of resistance to
"mental retention," in which a change of scale makes it difficult to
hear one version of the degree confirming another.) Thus "the curious intrusion of the imaginary"might well be described as a welcome
incorporationof the temporal: what the activated imagination does is
carry an impression from one time into another. And so it is in this
respect-the respect of hearing together different times-that hearing an event as passing differs from hearing it as consonant; it is as
though passing's being a relational quality in this sense is what makes
it so much less likely to disappear in free composition.29 (Perhaps
similarly for "forced and drastic mixture," which cannot be escaped
but instead must be accepted and accommodated.)
The passing tone in particular then stands out among the many
configurationsto which passing effect may be ascribed as the one that
offers no choice-the one that can be understood in no other way
than by mental retention of the preceding consonance until another
consonance comes along. And in light of this, much of Schenker's
later work can be read as arguing for the ascription of this effect to
other configurations-up to large sections of pieces-even though
they do not force it in this way. (Typically, Schenker tries to argue
that this effect must be ascribed to other configurations-though
without telling exactly how the trick is to be done, and indeed while
insisting that "the drafting of extensive analytical sketches" involves
319

"creative powers" which cannot be expected of even the ordinary
"musicalperson" [Free Composition, xxiv]; naturallyhe ends up only
arguing, inexplicitly, that it is desirable to do so, given certain presuppositions about the temporal organization of "masterworks.")
In this light it is fascinating to see the form that Schenker's "negative examples" take in the case of the second-species passing tone.
They are, as might be expected, examples of dissonance approached
or left by skip, but what they are meant to exemplify is not at all what
might be expected: not, that is, other-than-passingconfigurationsin
which dissonance might occur, but other-than-stepwise configurations to which the character of "passing"might be attributed:
As far as free compositionis concerned,it emancipates passingdisthe
sonancefrom the postulateof the second, so that it is possible, as an
extensionof the concept, to regardas passingdissonanceeven a dissonantnote thatleapsbetweentwo pointsof a givendefiniteharmony.
(I, 184)
The musical examples that follow (Examples 248-76 [I, 184-94])
speak for themselves; the sampling presented in Example 9 includes
those that depart far enough from the ordinary conception of the
passing tone to have elicited qualifying commentary from the editor:
of
Later,Schenkermightwell have renouncedhis explanation the c2in
as a passingtone in the space of a fourth. So far as the
Example[9a]
uppervoice is concerned,this c2 undoubtedlyprogressesto the d2 in
the fourthbar of the example. ... In Examples[9b and 9c] the asterisked notes are neighboringnotes from which the upper voice leaps
away;in both cases the normalcomplete neighboring-note
configuration is executedby anothervoice or instrument .... Generallyspeaking, the dissonanttones by leap discussedin this section all represent
of
in
prolongations morebasicphenomena(e.g., suspensions Example
[9d-presumably the second excerpt]). (I, 354-55)
This seems to be a delicate way of saying that all these passages, by
virtue of their leaps, really involve kinds of dissonance other than
passing tones; and it is absolutely right as far as that goes. But since
Schenker's remark just cited makes it clear that he knows the leaps
are there, and therefore that this is somehow precisely the point,
there is more important interpretive work to do than just promise
that he would eventually cease to say such things-such as find out
what he means here when he does say it. And the answer, at least
provisionally, is that the essential definition of the passing tone, at
least at this point in Schenker's development, is simply not that it is
a dissonance approached by step and resolved by step in the same
direction; rather, it is a note, dissonant with its predecessor, through
320

Brahms.Ein deutsches Requiem. IV
Soprano

1
jIJ J I-r r7 if
Wie

lieb - lich

sind dei - ne

I m

Woh - nun - gen,

Herr

Example 9a. (Book I, Example 250)
Brahms,"Nachtwache." Op. 104 No. 2
Soprano

bu r.rb r r
r
ru - fet das Horn des Wich-ters

drii - ben aus We - stern

I

Example 9b. (Book I, Example 251)
Mendelssohn,Symphony No. 3, IV
Vln. I

*,

>

Example 9c. (Book I, Example 252)
J.S. Bach, English Suite J.S. Bach, OrganPreludeand Fugue in C Minor
No. 6
(BMV 546)

Example 9d. (Book I, Example 248)

which its predecessor is "mentallyretained"-that is, one which does
not displace its predecessor-and the pattern of stepwise approach
and resolution is only the most normal (or the paradigmatic)configuration of notes by which this effect might be produced. Thus "passing tone" is one term in Schenker's Counterpoint that means
something substantially different from what it means in Gradus ad
Parnassum-because Schenker is adjusting its meaning to facilitate
his fantastic and profound extension of its scope. He is attaching the
term to a particular "psychological"rhythmic effect, rather than to
the arrangement of notes that most characteristicallyproduces that
effect. And surely this may be seen as the most amazing consequence
of his motivating intuition that the entities to which a theory should
address itself are not arrangementsof notes, but sounds.
Within Counterpoint,the most obvious sign of this attitude toward
the passing tone is Schenker's explanation of all the other dissonance
321

types as "prolongations"of the passing tone. The neighboring tone,
which in second species is "less natural"than the passing tone (I, 17879), is still not part of the "strictest formulation" of third species in
two voices (I, 230); while in the presentation of three-voice third species various neighboring-note configurations are evaluated on the
basis of how well they "[reflect] the underlying passing tone"whereby "is confirmed the priority of the passing-tone concept, as a
fundamental concept, to the neighboring-note concept, as a concept
merely derived from it" (II, 74-75).
Far more remarkable than this account of neighbors, however, is
the notorious explanation of why suspensions resolve downwardone phase of Schenker's thinking that has never been accepted by
even his most committed disciples.30 His argument, probably
uniquely in the literature, does not even address the issue of downward or upward direction; rather it examines each possible dissonance's two possible resolutions, chooses in each case by intervallic
criteria specific to that case-and happens to choose the lower resolution every time. (That is, the argument'sstructureleaves it conceivable that some suspensions would best resolve upward and others
downward.) And-the crucial point here-the basis for these intervallic preferences is a consideration of suspensions as if they were
passing tones.
The premise for this maneuver is ("we are surprisedto find") that
the two phenomena "have a common characteristic, namely that in
both, the dissonant element is situated only between two consonances!" (I, 260) What elicits the exclamation point is what elicits it
again a few lines later: "Consonance-Dissonance-Consonance!" (I,
261), which is to say, the temporal-qualitative"essence" of the passing tone, a dependent element between the two on which it depends.
Now stepwise passing motion is the most normal means by which this
quality is achieved; accordingly, when a dissonant suspension is encountered, "strict counterpoint . . ., in order to lend some interpre-

tation to the tone, invokes the only means available to it, namely
consonance. . . . [I]t provides the tone ...

with the consonance that

is only fitting" (I, 265). This is the consonance from which the dissonant suspension would have come, had it been a dissonant passing
tone; "the syncope is thus to be understood only as a product of abbreviation" (I, 267)-that is, of the elision of the passing motion's
starting point.
For each dissonance there are then two possibilities to be considered, as shown in Example 10. Under the principle that "if the tied
dissonance is from the outset only a passing dissonance, then the
basic rule of the dissonant passing tone remains fully as applicable
here as before, specifically, that the direction of motion by which it
322

A) in the upper counterpoint
I. the 7th:
a) j
jb)
- 77-

7

IJ

I

7-

7

77

2. the 4th:
a)

J

1 I 'J

b)

J IJ 11 J

1

I

4

4

3. the 9th:

X

sa)2

;

a)fJ

3 ij

b)

ili

[

9

9

4. the 2nd:
a)

b)

3
X

1I

11, J

B) in the lower counterpoint
5. the 2nd:
a)

F

2

IJ

r

6. the 4th:
a)

b)

fr

2

r

b)

I

A

1

11

7. the 7th:
a)

b)

II
r

1

4
4

4

~-

11

2

2

f

3

r
7

F

I

"S-

r r
7

r

Example 10. (Book I, Example 399)
arrivedbe maintained," "the answer ... depends on which direction
of passing motion should be assumed"; and this should be the one
that offers "the fullest possible, or most definitive, measure of consonance, so as to shape at least the brief moment of consonance323

effect for the tone in the most satisfactory way" (I, 267)-the
direction that secures the "best" sonority, not for the resolution, but
for the imaginary stepwise preparation.
The "fullest possible, or most definitive, measure" is determined
according to three principles (not explicit in Schenker's case-by-case
presentation, but inferably at work there). First: if possible, imagine
a preparatory consonance that permits the cantus-firmustone to be
heard as a root. This principle settles case 1 of the example in favor
of option a), 7-6 (because an imaginaryoctave lets c' be a root, while
a sixth does not), and case 5 in favor of option a), 2-3 (because an
imaginary unison has a similar advantage over an imaginary lower
third). Second: in cases not decided by the first principle-that is,
cases in which either of the possible consonances allows the cantusfirmus tone to be a root-if possible, imagine a preparatory consonance that forces it to be a root (that is, a fifth in preference to any
other interval). This settles only case 2, in favor of option a), 4-3.
Third: in cases not decided by the first two principles, imagine the
preparatory consonance that provides the fuller sonority (that is, a
third or a sixth in preference to a fifth in preference to an octave or
unison). This settles all the remaining cases-as ever, for the descending option a): case 3 in favor of 9-8 (because a tenth is fuller
than an octave) and case 4 in favor of 2-1 (because a third is fuller
than a unison); case 6 in favor of 4-5 (because a third beats a fifth);
and case 7 in favor of 7-8 (because a sixth beats an octave).
Later some of the suspensions chosen by these rules are rejected7-8 completely, 9-8, 2-1, and 4-5 under most conditions-for various ad hoc reasons, including serious conflicts between the three
principles and "practical"unwieldiness resulting from resolution to
perfect consonances.31Yet it is significantthat, in general, considerations of presentedsonority--sonority of resolution--give way before
considerations of imagined sonority: apparently there is no point in
inferring anything but the optimal preparation (and perhaps no possibility of doing so).
Since this line of argument can hardly have won Schenker over by
its elegance-nor, one must suspect, for want of an alternative, since
an invocation of "gravity"or "natural urges" would not have been
beneath him-his choice of it must be explained by his attachment to
the premise that suspensions are elliptical passing tones. How productive he considers this premise is perhaps most compactly shown in
his Preface to Book II, in the list of phenomena that he regards as
"prolongations"of "the essence of passing tones": in "the framework
of three-voice settings," consonant passing and neighboring tones,
passing motion through a fourth, rhythmic displacements of the
neighboring tone, composing-out, nodal points, and substitutions;
324

and, in "the combined species," the leaping passing tone, the accented passing tone, and the "obbligato two-voice setting" of passing
tones (II, xviii-xix)-in short, virtuallyevery technique of diminution
beyond arpeggiation. In an access of sentiment, he even associates
the premise of the passing tone with the image of good domestic
order:
In whateverguise (resultingfrom substitutionor other abbreviationprocesses)the dissonantpassingtone may be used [even in free composition], the consonancelying a second higheror lower standsat its
cradle-just as is demandedby the originalphenomenon.(II, 59)
Above all, of course, the concept of the passing tone is the main
tributaryto the concept of Stufe, as is made clear again and again. In
the most striking of these places, the consequences of this "curious
intrusion of the imaginary"are derived: with second-species passing
tones,
Ourpowerof imagination
muston its own carryforwardthe harmony
of the downbeat;and by doing so, it preparesitself most appropriately
to graspthat greatestmarvelof imagination
which governsfree comof
position:the scale degree, whichrepresentsthe highestramification
thatlingeringof a harmony
throughthe durationof passingevents. (II,
59)
Counterpoint'sfinal section, "On the Elision of a Voice as Bridge
to Free Composition," offers a simplified picture of Stufen on the
model of implied cantus-firmustones. Example 11 shows a Fuxian
mixed-species exercise with its cantus firmus deleted; the deletion
produces apparently unruly dissonance treatment in a few places,
such as the third measure, and Schenker proposes that each such dissonance treatment can be understood through mental assimilation of
it to the single span of an imaginary cantus-firmustone. In the third
measure, such an inferred note is constrained to be consonant with
both notes of the lower voice-c1 because it is on the downbeat and
a because it is approached and left by skip-and with the resolution
of the suspension, c2, in the upper voice. While this would leave a
number of possibilities-e2 if the third line were to be imagined on

ti

r
11r
KTrhfIrrrr
J
rtf Irr IF r I: r
I:rr r
Exapl9

J

o

Ir IrJ I 11I
^9

Example 11. (from Book 2, Example 395)
325

top, al or el (Fux's actual note) if in the middle, and f, C, A or F if
on the bottom-Schenker's argument does not really entertain all of
them. Rather, his preference, explained not in the "Bridge"chapter
but in the three-voice second-species chapter, is to place the inferred
note in the bass as a representation of the harmony the actual voices
already imply (a strategy closer to Rameau's than Schenker cared to
notice) -so that he would almost certainly choose A in this case. The
thought behind this seems to be just that it is from lower voices that
harmonic information "normally"comes: when a dissonant secondspecies passing tone occurs in the lower voice, "the lower voice gives
up the means to do what it was above all obliged to do, namely to
provide an audible continuation of the harmony established on the
downbeat," leaving the note to be mentally retained; Schenker then
represents "the tone to be prolonged in a lower register-since it is
purely imaginary (geistig) in nature" (which does not seem to mean
that the lower register is the place for imaginary notes, exactly, but
that imaginarynotes may be placed in any register appropriate, and
the appropriate register for harmony-giving notes is the bass)-so
that the originalbass voice, with its passing tone, "takes on the meaning of another upper voice" (II, 57).
In sum, this is the model sketched by Schenker:
It is possiblein some way to find a unifyingtone of longer value that
interprets the movement and voice leading of voices in various
rhythms.... Usually it will be suppliedthere by our own perception
... in the lowerregister,whereit providesa substructure the upper
for
voices and, especially,confersalteredmeaningsupon the dissonances.
(II, 270-71)
He rounds it off with uncharacteristicmodesty: "Our guess is that it
is the scale degrees that complete the setting in this way" (II, 271).
Presumablyhe is aware that he has not yet provided a theory of how
the Stufenarise, but only pointed toward Stufen using the materialsof
species.32

Accordingly, there are several different ways to describe what
Schenker is doing with his talk of prolonged passing tones and imaginary cantus firmustones. He could be thought simply to be giving an
inadequate, or merely sketchy, account of the matter, which, for adequacy and completeness, would require a more formal and exhaustive account than he ever gives (even in Free Composition) of exactly
what configurations, under what conditions, could be heard as passing, heard as constituting Stufen, and so on. Closely related to this is
the idea that species counterpoint gives him the chance to define the
important attributes roughly, by reference to familiar musical examples, and to show them in action in musical contexts simple enough
326

that the roughness of the definitions will not be a problem; thus, in
the artificialworld of species the theory can acquire a plausibilitythat
might not accrue to it in its necessarily more ad hoc operation in free
composition. Carrying this trend of redescription one step further,
one might say that the circumscribed music of strict counterpoint
serves mostly as a source of imagery; that is, that Schenker uses the
second-species passing tone essentially as a metaphorfor the relation
of one free-composition passage to another-a metaphor unlike what
most theorists probably imagine under that name because it has no
extramusicalelement: it compares the musical thing that it describes
to another thing that is also music. In this sense, it is by design that
Schenker never develops a rigorous set of rules to derive analyses
from pieces; he must have realized (as little as he may have liked the
idea) that arrangementsof notes do not determininethe attributions
that can be made to them-though they certainly affect the ease of
making various attributionsand the consequences they will have. (He
probably conceived this as a matter of not trying to limit in advance
what the "masters"might be able to come up with by way of of prolongation; he seems to have thought of this as itself a domain of compositional invention, and in a sense to have tried to portray such
invention by casting his own analyses as fantasy recompositions of the
It
"masterworks.")33 should be obvious that the language of attributions that can be made, as opposed to effects that must follow, has
above all the advantage of implying no such determinism.34
The progression across these several descriptions is probably from
more to less traditional; there may be reason to think it is also from
less to more accurate as a description of what Schenker actually is
doing (with room left for any number of positions on whether he
should have been doing something else). On any of these accounts,
Schenker deserves credit for augmenting the tonal-theoretic ontology, essentially by expanding the concept of "passing"so that it could
be applied to many entities besides paradigmaticpassing notes; that
is, he created (or made much more useful) a category of possible attribution. The nature of his "expansion"is to identify the attribute of
being "passing"not with the pitch-structuraldefinition "stepwise in
between," but with an essentially rhythmicdefinition that generalizes
it: "within the time of: that is, not yet displacing-and inferably on
the way to a successor entity on the same level as." (And in this sense
his expansion amounts to the concept of structurallevels.)
VII
It is a striking consequence of this way of reading Schenker-one
that brings this essay finally around to a close-that it can eventually
327

make the search for analytical rules attaching directly to arrangements of notes seem as misconceived as the search for compositional
rules that directly require or forbid such arrangements. It is not so
clear after all that there are laws leading from "tones organized in
such and such a way" to "effects" that they "must"produce. If there
are laws operating at all, they may be only those inherent in the
meaning of a particularattribution, that determine what it will be like
to let a given stretch of sound sustain that attribution. A little more
abstractly, there very well may not be rules of the form "all and only
configurationswith such and such properties will (or can) be heard as
passing," but only rules of the form "to hear a configurationas passing means to read such and such into it"; so that carryingout an analysis does not mean following rules (at least at this level), but trying
things out to discover how they work.
Perhaps this observation is not news-certainly it shouldn't bebut when it is put to work as a premise for reading Schenker's later
analyses it does tend to make them look different from the way they
are usually represented. A much-discussed analysis-actually not
quite an analysis, but a sketch, namely that of "Aus meinen Tranen
spriessen," the second song of Schumann's Dichterliebe, in Free
Composition-contains a little-discussed peculiarity that will serve as
an illustration.35
The graph, reproduced in Example 12, is presented
to support the theoretical claim of ?88 that "The return to (3) [in an
interruption]is not a cadence"; but it is also referred to in a number
of other places (??117, 170, 189, 197, and 211), and some of the ancillary points are of greater interest here.
The crux is the song's second measure. According to Schenker's
generative scheme, the background's initial c#2 is elaborated by an
upper-neighboringd2 in the middleground(or, more precisely, in the
first of several distinguishable layers that Schenker's middleground
graphconflates). In the next of those layers, d' in the bass harmonizes
the neighboring d2, and, presumablyin yet another layer, the bass d'
is sustained through d2's return to c#2, converting what was "originally" d2's resolution into a dissonant passing tone from d2 down to
b1, the next pitch of the backgroundsuccession. In ?196 Schenker remarks of such transformations that "when the main tone in a
neighboring-note figure returns at a dissonant interval . .. , then a
five-note diminution results in which the neighboring note seems to
fall away"; since to have five notes this diminution must be the entire
succession C#2-d2-c#2-bl-al
(which is borne out by a citation of Free
Composition's Figure 76), Schenker evidently conceives of the ambiguity of the middle elements as somehow smoothing over the figure's internal articulations. In particular,neither the second note nor
the third, apparently, can be securely subordinated to the other. (In
328

Schumann,"Aus meinen Tranenspriessen"(Dichterliebe. no. 2)
A

3

-

2

I

:,- -2

%" -L2
(n.n.)

m.

II

4

8
(n.n.)

(Al

w
ts^
'IC

B

Example 12. (Free Composition, Figure 22

this sense, what has just been described as conflation of layers may
actually be functional rather than merely inexplicit.)36
So far, then, the sketch says that c#2 (over a) is to be "retained
mentally," as a way of listening to d2 (over dl), which "prolongs"it,
until it finds a successor at its own level in bl (over el). Meanwhile d2
(over dl) is to be "retainedmentally" as a way of listening to c#2 (still
over d', in theory)-again, until d2 (over dl) finds a successor at its
own level or better (in this case, better).37 And unless Schenker is
contradictinghimself gratuitously, this implies that a tone can function as neighboring even without returning to what it neighbors. At
any rate, in the sketch up to this point it is treated as a "concidence"
that the passing tone down from the neighboring tone has the same
pitch that a resolution of the neighboring tone would have; that is,
although it somehow has the "potential" to resolve the neighboring
tone, it does not succeed in doing so.
This peculiaritybecomes more peculiar at the next level. Schenker
remarksin ?170 that "passingsevenths in the case of IV8-7-V . . are
usually transformedinto consonances," and he cites this passage as an
instance.38Thus, in the foreground graph, a now harmonizes the dissonant passing tone c#2, producing nothing less than a root-position
tonic triad. This a remains in parentheses, presumably so as not to
interrupt the dl-to-el movement that stands for the IV-to-V Stufengang.
Very well-how does this make sense? How, in particular, is the
attribution "return to Kopfton, resolving the neighbor" to be withheld from the pitch of the Kopfton over the tonic triad (indeed, arguably a strongertonic than the first one-particularly when the song
is heard in the cycle, with an initial unclarityconferred on its tonic by
the ending of the firstsong)?39One way it doesn't make sense, surely,
is on the assumption of a law somewhere to the effect that "tones
organized as they are in these measures produce the effect of a consonant passing tone, whether one wants it or not." On the contrary,
the analysis seems strange precisely because-as a rule-tones organized as they are in these measures produce the effect of the allegedly
passing chord resolving the neighboring chord.
On the other hand, it also doesn't make very much sense as an
analytical mistake. A wisecrack of Wittgenstein's makes the point
nicely:
You might say: 'For a blunder,that's too big. If you suddenlywrote
numbersdown on the blackboardand then said: 'Now, I'm going to
add,' and then said: '2 and 21 is 13,' etc. I'd say: 'Thisis no blunder.'
330

There are cases where I'd say he's mad, or he's making fun. Then
there are cases where I'd look for an entirely different explanation
altogether.40
The present case is of the last type. The sketch doesn't represent
the misapplicationof an analyticalmethod that tells how various configurationsof notes will fall into perceptual hierarchies, "whetherone
wants it or not." Rather, it is a sign that the analytical method must
be something quite different.
One alternative is suggested, subversively, by Schenker's own language: the effect of passing may be an effect that these notes can produce if one does want it. The effect isn't automatic, but it's
possible-if it's desirable. This alternative is also suggested, even
more strongly, by the reflection that this unscrupulous-sounding
mode of thought is exactly characteristicof musicians who are doing
something-like composing, performing, or listening-rather than
trying to describe something. Perhaps this is clearest in the case of
performers: when a score does not specify every last detail of performance (of balance, timing, and so on), a performer makes decisions about these things according to a conception of the passage
(under the guidance of an attributivetheory, that is); this conception
is not of what the passage automatically is (even if the performer
never entertains any other conception), but of what it can be. It is
constrained, but not fully determined, by what is in the score. Composers confront the same-situation-more literally, if anything:imagining an only partially specified passage, a composer is apt to be
reading into it (attributingto it, that is) much more than the sounds
so far chosen would convey on their own; so that completing the passage may involve specifying more aspects of it that would conduce to
this so far underdetermined attribution. And every serious listener
knows the experience of casting about for a better way to hear something that persists in sounding not quite right.41
In short, the thought processes that constitute music have everything to do with figuring out-not necessarily determining, but perhaps deciding-how something might be heard, what it would take to
hear it that way, what would happen if it were heard that way: quite
a bit besides what the passage is. And Schenker's sketch is easiest to
interpret in the imagined context of a singer and pianist performing
the song's second measure in such as way as to round off a unit with
the second chord-perhaps by means of a generous small-scale diminuendo from the first chord and a slight pause before the anacrusisto
the next measure. An imaginary Schenker might then coach them:
"No-shape that beat so that you keep moving, on into the next
331

measure. Phrase across the rest (as if the c#2 were a passing tone)."
If the performershad been so educated as to object that the chord in
question is perfectly suited to resolve the neighbor and conclude a
unit, and indeed that letting it do so is precisely what would constitute
analytically informed performance, their coach might continue:
"Well, yes-and in fact I want it to do both things (as you can see in
my apparently self-contradictorysketch): ideally I'd like the listener
to be able to feel the closure and then to realize that it's only the most
provisional closure, that the line is still moving." (In declining to impose the final-state analysis on the passage from the firstmoment, this
Schenker is becoming more imaginary.) "But (as you quite rightlyobserve) the pitches will take care of the closure, more or less by themselves; what you have to do is promote the non-closural side a little
more." If more support were needed, this phantasmal coach might
also point out that Schumann'stwo accents, on the downbeats of the
second and third measures, cut across the slur over measures one (including upbeat) and two, in more or less the same way-so that, once
one thinks to look for it, there is quite a bit in the notation to imply
just this kind of tension between two different groupings of it.
(Furthermore-if the performers had not yet had their fill of talkder Geistige might add that doubting the closural value of rootposition tonic triads is an essential listening strategy for measures
three and four, and for analogous places, as well.)42
This is, at any rate, one story that might be told to make sense of
Schenker'simage of a consonant passing tone coinciding with the resolution of, but not resolving, a large-scale neighbor. In this story
there is no issue of whether the note in question "really is" what
Schenker says-only of what would be involved in making it so, including the issue of how much of Schumann'sscore can be interpreted
how deeply in the attempt.43The quality of "passing"is here clearly
not an automatic outcome of the way the tones are organized, but an
interpretationto which the tones' organizationleaves them open, and
to which rewardsaccrue by way of the interpretationsto which tones'
organization over longer timespans leaves them open.
If Schenker's overt contribution in Counterpointis his rejection of
the very idea of rules directly determining the compositional choices
of "a Beethoven," in favor of rules for the "effects" of arrangements
of notes (in terms of which such choices can be explained, if at all),
a careful reading of his work points to a partialrejection of these rules
in turn-or at least a rewriting of them in terms of rules determining
the content of possible attributions(and thereby roughly constraining
the making of these attributions). And in this context his analytical
system clearly has the appearance, not of a set of rules for adding
notes, layer by layer (let alone for removing them), but at most of a
332

set of rules for formulating (even if not for deciding upon) complex
attributions by making simpler attributions, layer by layer.
In this light, perhaps his most remarkable contribution is to have
generalized the definition of a particularkind of attribution, namely
that of passing status, so that it could be made of many more kinds of
entity than just the "passingtone." So radical is this extension of application that it can seem an outright invention (or, for those who
prefer, discovery) rather than just a redefinition. And as such it is
luminouslyexemplary for the music-theoreticenterprise, which, in its
happiest and most relevant manifestations, is precisely a matter of ontological invention-of the prodigal multiplication of qualities, of
"things for things to be"-rather than a matter of accounting for or
justifying anything.
Musicians in the act-composers only most obviously-are in the
business of making up sounds for things to have (by way of arranging
for things to have those sounds); the reason to think and talk and
write about what musicians do is to sharpen the experience of those
sounds, by adding discourse to our means of access to them. And at
least to this extent analysis must be invention. If there is anything
healthy to be read out of Schenker's sad resolution that
Just to participatein the masterwork a truer life than to dissipate
is
oneself in unfulfillment. this sense the masterwork the only path
In
is
for all those who are not called44
it is perhaps the idea that someone else's masterly musical invention can be a way of getting something into one's own ear that one
might not have been able to invent unassisted. In any case it is along
this line-the line, that is, of reciprocal, responsive invention, rather
than of mere gatekeeping-that Schenker might most appropriately
have associated himself with Beethoven; and along this line that he
might most appropriatelyinspire his successors.45

333

NOTES
1. Counterpoint: A Translation of Kontrapunkt by Heinrich Schenker. Volume II
of New Musical Theories and Fantasies [Book I: Cantus Firmus and Two-Voice
Counterpoint; Book II: Counterpoint in Three and More Voices, Bridges to
Free Composition], translated by John Rothgeb and Jurgen Thym, edited by
John Rothgeb (New York: Schirmer Books, 1987). In this article Counterpoint
will be cited by book and page number, and the other two volumes of New
Musical Theories and Fantasies, Harmony (edited and annotated by Oswald
Jonas, translated by Elisabeth Mann Borgese; Chicago: University of Chicago
Press, 1954, paperback reprint Boston: MIT Press, 1973) and Free Composition
(translated and edited by Ernst Oster, New York: Schirmer Books, 1979), by
title and paragraph number.
2. "Look, gentlemen, that is the rule; naturally I don't write that way" (Harmony,
177).
3. A disappointingly timorous rendering of "Wie ich die Ubelstand beseitige,"
which could come out as "How I do away with this abuse," but which in any
case should be in the first person. To comment briefly on a matter which this
article will not treat at length: a tendency to improve Schenker's deportment in
this way is perhaps the only respect in which the translators' work can be
faulted.
4. I am grateful to Jason Gibbs for helping me to recognize this during our discussions of his dissertation essay "Prolongation in Order-Determinate Music"
(University of Pittsburgh, 1989).
5. Meanwhile there is certainly a study worth doing of the image of language and
linguistics in Schenker's work-and perhaps specifically of the influence on his
theory of the structure of German. Most immediately suggestive is the observation, in the first section of "Fortsetzung der Urlinie-Betrachtungen"in the second Yearbook of Das Meisterwerkin der Musik (Munich: Drei Masken Verlag,
1926; all three Jahrbicher reprinted in one volume, Hildesheim: Georg Olms
Verlag, 1974), that "Die Spannung eines Zuges entspricht der Spannung im
Nacheinander einer sprachlichen Einheit, deren Inhaltsbildung ebenfalls nur
durch eine geistige Spannung verbiirgt wird" (p. 11). ("The tension of a Zug
corresponds to the tension in the succession of a linguistic unit, the formation
of whose content is likewise secured only through a mental tension.")
6. Matthew Brown and Douglas J. Dempster's "The Scientific Image of Music
Theory" (Journal of Music Theory 33: 65-106) is a particularly lurid recent example. (See also note 8.)
7. It would have been reassuring to see some distinction drawn between the middle element of Example 2 and the others-along the lines of the first and last
presenting melodic minor seconds within scales, which the middle one only simulates across the divide between scales, so that the middle motive is a good deal
less plausible than the last. (And it might in any case have been more consistent
with Schenker's main text for him to have invoked the combination of the motive forms A-Bb harmonized VI-V7 of IV, and A-B~ , harmonized II-V7; Marion A. Guck has pointed out that this might make the passage more an
extension of one motive form than a compression of several-which suggests
interesting possibilities of hearing the motive's continuation wildly transformed
in the sequel.) As is often the case, the very infelicities of the explanation make

334

it a particularly strong illustration of the author's intent-in the sense that, since
it could not have been recommended by elegant conclusiveness, it must all the
more clearly have been recommended by the type of explanation it is.
8. In outline, the explanatory strategy here attributed to Schenker corresponds to
the one called "functional" by Carl Hempel in "The Logic of Functional Analysis" (in Aspects of Scientific Explanation And Other Essays in the Philosophy
of Science, New York: The Free Press, 1965, pp. 297-330). Hempel represents
functional explanation as a specially circumscribed form of "deductivenomological" explanation (an account of which may be found in the volume's
title article, which has made the music-theoretic rounds to some extent), and
that many problems can result from confounding it with the standard form. My
"Function, Explanation, and Interpretation" (a lecture to the 1991 joint meeting of the AMS/SEM/SMT in Oakland, California) explores this issue further.
9. Roger Sessions, in "Heinrich Schenker's Contribution" (Modern Music 12:
170-78; reprinted in Roger Sessions on Music: Collected Essays, edited by Edward T. Cone, Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1979, pp. 231-40) makes
the same extension in a characteristically unorthodox and astute definition of
Stufe: "According to this conception a harmony . . . may be roughly defined as
a complete unit, formed as often of many 'chords' as of a single one, or frequently consisting not of chords at all but of single notes, or traits of melodic
character" (pp. 232-33). And indeed Schenker's Harmony protractedly flirts
with, though it never quite declares for, the notion that a harmony must have
motivic content to be a Stufe.
10. As this sort of underlying line develops, in Schenker's thought, into the upper
line of the Ursatz, many of its qualities as a melody fall away-which is in many
respects a great loss. A particularly interesting intermediate stage may be seen
in the Urlinie Schenker attributes to the first movement of Beethoven's F-minor
Piano Sonata, Op. 2, No. 1, in his analysis in the second Tonwille pamphlet
(Vienna and Leipzig: Tonwille-Flugblatterverlag [A. Gutmann and Friedr. Hofmeister], 1922, 25-48): its Merkmale are not only intervallic (up a third and
down a sixth, all by step), but include (consistently) placement of the ascending
tones in metrically "weak" measures or parts of measures and, with this, an
initial hesitation followed by acceleration toward the change of direction.
11. This state of affairs will not seem unfamiliar to readers of the first volume of the
Theories and Fantasies who have attempted to divine a definition of Stufe from
the passages ostensibly devoted to providing one (Harmony, ??78-81 especially). The definition, under the heading "The Scale-Step as Guiding Device as
Contrasted with the Triad," essentially restates the heading, saying that the
"concept of the scale step . . . is far loftier and far more abstract," that "not
every triad must be considered a scale-step," and that it "is a higher and more
abstract unit," which "at times . . . may even comprise several harmonies"
(138-39). The ensuing "How To Recognize Scale-Steps: Some Hints" is devoted completely to hints for recognizing harmonies that are not scale-steps, on
the grounds that they are easily recognized as passing or neighboring, or that
they do not make an acceptable progression with the other scale-degrees in the
vicinity (and it should be noted that Harmony's theory of acceptable Stufengang
never disappears from Schenker's later theory). The pattern is similar to that of
Counterpoint: grand claims for the favored entity, derision of rival concepts,
astute suggestions for representing more complex formations as elaborations

335

and extensions of the favored entity, but very little direct characterization of the
entity itself.
12. In so many words in "Musical Cosmology," Perspectives of New Music 15/2:
122-32, and "What Lingers On (, When The Song Is Ended)," Perspectives of
New Music 16/1: 102-10; but implicitly in Meta-Variations as well (published
serially in Perspectives of New Music 8-11), and, more recently, in particularly
compressed but complete form in "The Logic of What?" (Journal of Music Theory 33: 107-16). The short quotations that follow in the text are all from p. 104
of "What Lingers On".
13. Das Meisterwerk II, pp. 97-104.
14. "Diese Oktav-Koppelung erfiillt das Bedurfnis des Instruments, das, einem
menschlichen Wesen gleich, sich gern in seiner Fiille offenbart: wenn nur dem
Ursatz Geniige geschieht, warum sollte denn nicht auch das Instrument eine
solch Erftillung verstatten?" (p. 100) (The Music Forum translation [by Hedi
Siegel, Volume II: 274-82], taking a stronger line on what Schenker should be
allowed to say, denatures the cello by quite a bit: "The octave coupling exploits
the resources of the instrument, which, in almost human fashion, likes to express itself fully; if the requirements of the fundamental structure are satisfied,
why should the instrument be denied like satisfaction?"; even the imaginable
ambiguity of "eine solche Erfillung" seems to be resolved in favor of a comparison to the Ursatz's, not the human essence's, satisfaction, by the change of
pattern: "exploits . . . fully ... is satisfied . .. like satisfaction" for "erfiillt . ..
in seiner Fiille . . . Geniige geschieht. . . eine solche Erfillung.")
15. Perhaps it is professionally unstrategic to express even this much skepticism
about the ideology on which composing well means maintaining a true relation
to some body of preestablished (and not necessarily conscious) knowledge;
since the myth under which composers are accepted (or at least tolerated) in
music departments appears to be that they may possess such knowledge (expressed in "mastery" of a "craft")-not that they are "simply" good at making
things up.
16. "Genau so wie diese Fuge einmalig ist, genau so einmalig ist das Gesetz, das ihr
Lebensgesetz ist: die Fuge selbst hat dies Gesetz geboren, nicht Bach-mit der
Kraft eines Genies hat er es nur erkannt und sich gefiigt." From "Das Organische der Fuge: aufgezeigt an der I. C-Moll Fuge aus dem Wohltemperierten
Klavier von Joh. Seb. Bach," in Das Meisterwerk in der Musik, Jahrbuch II, p.
66. I am grateful to Fred Everett Maus for calling my attention to this remarkable quote in this context.
17. One suspects that this image may have had its distinct value for an author reluctantly deciding to give up composition while wishing to believe he knew what
composers must know. In any case the image of master-composition taking
place beyond the realm of choice is consistent, and has its place in the structure
of the analytical method, in the form of the method's consistent backgroundto-foreground orientation and, therewith, Schenker's pointed refusal to provide
rules of reduction. (In this connection, see also note 33.)
18. "Schoenbergian" is here meant rather loosely to refer to the ardently antihierarchical attitude expressed in, among other places, the marvelous "'NonHarmonic' Tones" chapter of his Harmonielehre (Theory of Harmony,
translated by Roy E. Carter, Berkeley: University of California Press, 1978, pp.
309-44) and attacked by Schenker in the "Fortsetzung der Urlinie-

336

Betrachtungen" in Jahrbuch II of Das Meisterwerk (pp. 9-42); Schoenberg appears never to have committed himself to print on the subject of this
movement.
19. V7 of F has a noteworthy history in the rest of the movement, of which the high
spots are: its reinterpretation, in the "development," as "German augmentedsixth chord," so that the Bb-to-Bl move, now locally motivated, leads to a short
passage on V of E minor-after which the chord reappears as V of F and at last
leads to a sustained F major (whose dissolution into local D minor may be
heard to reflect the approach to this chord in the focal passage); and the hearty,
decisive (even structurally "final") cadence, late in the "recapitulation," in
which the chord is produced one last time (it is avoided in the chromatic rise at
the very end) and successfully domesticated as applied V to the IV introducing
a big cadence.
20. Any practical success is still apt to be compromised by the work's tremendous
length (not to mention impressive cost); so that the enrichment of some other
book with negative examples remains the likeliest expedient. While Counterpoint is the work of Schenker's that has been most directly and completely assimilated in the secondary literature, in two highly sophisticated and highly
contrasting textbooks- Counterpoint in Composition by Felix Salzer and Carl
Schachter (New York: McGraw-Hill, 1969) and An Introduction to Tonal Theory by Peter Westergaard (New York: W. W. Norton & Co., 1975)-as well as
a clear and comprehensive article by John Rothgeb-"Strict Counterpoint and
Tonal Theory", Journal of Music Theory 19: 260-84)-its use of negative examples has never been remarked or imitated. (Also mentionable in this connection is Elemente der Stimmfuhrung (Der strenge Satz) by Schenker's pupil
Herman Roth [Stuttgart: Verlag von Carl Gruninger Nachf. Ernst Klett,
1926?], which gives Schenker's rules and essentially Schenker's reasons, with
some of Schenker's examples but by and large not the negative ones; I am
grateful to Milton Babbitt for alerting me to its existence and providing me with
a copy.) Schenker's attitude has been noted by Nicholas Cook, whose statement "doing a Schenkerian analysis means conceptualizing the discrepancies
between the principles of strict counterpoint and the elaborated surface of the
music in question" ("Schenker's Theory of Music as Ethics," Journal of Musicology 7: 437) captures the point compactly-even seeming to represent the implicit practice of Counterpoint more directly than the later practice; parts of his
"Music Theory and 'Good Comparison': A Viennese Perspective" (Journal of
Music Theory 33: 117-41) elaborate the same view.
21. The accusation is of unqualified error, bringing Bach down to the mortal level:
"Thus Bach and Bellermann force themselves-just for the sake of theory! -to
begin as well as end the chorale harmonically with the triad on G" (I, 38). There
is a paper yet to be written about what these two chorale settings (Riemenschneider Nos. 51 and 160) become when they are restored to their status as
parts of larger compositions (Cantata No. 91, "Gelobet seist du, Jesu Christ"
and Cantata No. 64, "Sehet, welch' eine Liebe hat uns der Vater erzeiget," respectively); in general it is curious that Schenker, so sensitive to the breadth of
context needed to understand individual events within movements, rarely if
ever considered the possibility that relevant contexts might extend beyond
movements' boundaries.
22. "To Henry Martin" in "Two Replies," Perspectives of New Music 15: 242.

337

23. This discussion incidentally offers a good illustration of how far the aims of
music theory are from providing the simplest possible explanations of passages:
the passage in question is obviously simpler as an unqualified succession of
major thirds than as what Schenker makes it. One might almost say that the aim
of listening (that is, of an exercise of attributive theory) is precisely to make a
passage more complex; whereafter, if there is any simplifying work to be done,
it is to simplify as much as possible the explanation of how the notes "produce"
all the "effects" attributed to them (one might therefore say: to produce the
simplest possible explanation of the data, once one has complicated the data as
much as possible).
24. Two collateral reflections seem appropriate. First, it would be inconsistent with
the general stance of this paper to imagine that there was a fact of the matter;
as it is, there is not very much to be made of the c-gl twelfth except in the minutely local connection of 5-6 over dl and then c (and perhaps, through this,
the implausibly remote one to m. 116 of the last movement and its environs),
and in this sense very little reward for attributing consonance to the interval. If
?77 of Harmony is any indication, Schenker would probably include it among
those "fifth-relationships" that are not "perceptible in the foreground" but "do
their work more discretely [sic] in the background"--under definitions of "foreground" and "background" rather different from the familiar ones, needless to
say (though there is something suggestive in the possibility that the "background" is where the rules are simply true). On the other hand-and this is the
second reflection- ?54 of the same work suggests a different way out: deny that
c-g' is an interval (because it is not "harmonizable")-from which it follows that
it cannot be a fifth, let alone a dissonant one.
25. Quoted from Handbuch der Harmonie (3rd ed., Leipzig: Breitkopf und Hartel,
1898), p. 138; in the translation the citation is for some reason displaced from
the text, where it is in the original, to a footnote.
26. Handbuch der Harmonie, p. 139.
27. For all that may be blood-curdling about such statements as
We live in an era in which all values in human relations are turned upside
down, by reason of false, unworthy sentimentality: those who need to be led
become leaders; the woman assumes the man's role; the child is pampered as
an "individuality" and excused from work before even having learned to
work; workers who represent mere instruments in human form consider
themselves producers. (I, xix)
there may be some compensation-certainly there is some illumination-in a
counterpart confession like
It is my fervent wish that mankind may ultimately be permitted to be guided
through the euphony of art to the noble spirit of selection and synthesis, and
to shape all institutions of his earthly existence, such as state, marriage, love
and friendship, into true works of art according to the laws of artistic synthesis! (II, xx)
Be this as it may, it is difficult to go along with editorial urging
to recognize that however much Schenker may have regarded his musical precepts as an integral part of a unified world-view, they are, in fact, not at all
logically dependent on any of his extramusical speculations. Indeed no
broader philosophical context is necessary-or even relevant-to their understanding. (I, xiv)

338

-not so much the first sentence, which can be saved by a strict enough reading
of "logically dependent," as the second, which after all does not insulate these
precepts from philosophical presuppositions but merely attaches them to new
ones. For presenting Counterpoint-uniquely in the Theories and Fantasies
series-in a fully unexpurgated form, with nothing omitted and nothing hustled
to the back of the book, Rothgeb and Thym are much to be commended.
28. In its capacity as "boundary interval" [Grenzintervall] (I, 79)-a puzzling term,
ambiguous as between "triad-determining interval" and, conceivably, "outside
interval of a closely spaced triad" (which seems to have something to do with
the dissonant "nature" of the fifth's inversion).
29. A conversation with Steven Dembski helped greatly to promote this realization.
30. Salzer and Schachter invoke the "relaxing of melodic tension" (p. 81), as, in
effect, does Westergaard (p. 147); and Rothgeb, in his notes to the translation,
takes exception to "Schenker's rather unconvincing argumentation" (I, 356),
which "often appears somewhat casuistic" (II, 277).
31. This kind of thinking is made completely explicit in Westergaard's classification
of suspensions as "strong" (and always permitted), "intermediate" (usable only
in conjunction with a strong suspension in another voice), and "weak" (never
usable) (pp. 148-49).
32. The guess that the Stufen fill the cantus firmus tones' function is the one that
Schenker made almost at once-notably in ?88 of Harmony, where a diagram
makes the analogy explicit. (Jonas eliminated this diagram from the translation,
but cited it in his own Introduction to the Theory of Heinrich Schenker [translated and edited by John Rothgeb, New York: Longman Inc., 1982], p. 57; I am
grateful to Robert Snarrenberg for reminding me of this.)
33. Thus Allan R. Keiler is abundantly right-perhaps right in even more senses
than he meant in the immediate context-to say
When Schenker claims that "there are no rules which could be laid down
once and for all for recognizing scale steps," he means what he says. We
could make this more explicit still and argue now that Schenker has no desire
to replace his generatively conceived analytic system with one that would assign analyses to pieces in the form of a strict system of rules of reduction. And
he probably knew instinctively that he could not achieve the results that he
intended with any such attempt.
in his astute paper "On Some Properties of Schenker's Pitch Derivations,"
Music Perception 1: 210. This essay is also indebted in various ways to two other
papers of Keiler's: "The Empiricist Illusion: Narmour's Beyond Schenkerism,"
Perspectives of New Music 17/1: 161-95; and "Music as Metalanguage:
Rameau's Fundamental Bass," in Music Theory: Special Topics, edited by
Richmond Browne, New York: Academic Press, 1981, pp. 83-100.
34. There may be something in the idea of using attributive theories-that is, listeners' frames of mind-and arrangements of notes as bases for (more or less)
"deductive" explanations of those arrangements' sounds (under those attributive theories); but this is another paper (or a series of papers begun by my lecture cited in note 8).
35. The sketch is the primary example in Allen Forte's 1959 article "Schenker's
Conception of Musical Structure" (reprinted in Readings in Schenker Analysis
and Other Approaches, Maury Yeston, ed., New Haven: Yale, 1977, pp. 3-37,

339

preceded by a brief but substantial commentary by Yeston); with this article's
wide circulation in mind, Joseph Kerman made the sketch the primary target of
his "How We Got into Analysis, and How to Get Out" (Critical Inquiry 7: 31132); and Arthur Komar took issue with it in "The Music of Dichterliebe: The
Whole and its Parts," his analytical contribution to his edition of Dichterliebe
(New York: Norton, 1971).
36. If true, this suggestion would be completely consonant with what Gregory Proctor and Herbert Lee Riggins say about "replacement figures" in "Levels and the
Reordering of Chapters in Schenker's Free Composition" (Music Theory Spectrum 10: 102-26).
37. Notice that this is what it means for the passing tone to be of the "secondspecies" type rather than the "third-species" type. Thus it is embedded in
Schenker's conception at the deepest level that a prolongation need not close
with a return to what is prolonged.
38. Forte makes a point of this passing tone's transformation between middleground and foreground, which Yeston underscores; but neither of them mentions the relation of the passing consonance to the ambiguity between the
middleground and background. Although it is impossible to base a reliable interpretation primarily on an omission, it is possible to speculate that this particular omission is easier to make if the generative process is conceived as
adding notes layer by layer than if it is conceived as making assertions layer by
layer.
39. This is in fact Komar's main reason for placing the first representation of the
Kopfton later (as Yeston also notes); and Komar makes a very nice point about
the final (and initial, and recurrent) harmonic progression of the preceding song
turning up again in the middle section of this one.
40. Ludwig Wittgenstein, Lectures and Conversations on Aesthetics, Psychology,
and Religious Belief, Compiled from notes taken by Yorick Smythies, Rush
Rhees, and James Taylor, edited by Cyril Barrett; Berkeley: University of
California Press, 1966?, pp. 61-62.
41. The logic of these remarks was particularly well formulated and exemplified in
two papers given at the 1989 AMS/SMT meeting in Austin: "A Performer's Use
of Musical Analysis" by Charles Fisk, and "Musical Performance as Composition" by Fred Everett Maus.
42. If quite unconcerned about wasting everyone's time, the psycho-Schenker
might complain about how unobservant Kerman had been of his treatment of
the matter, and suggest that all parties review ?120 of Harmony.
43. And not only of the musical part of the score, of course: the impossibility of
breaking sharply after "spriessen" (and, similarly, after "werden"and "klingen"
in the comparable places later) is also taken in by this interpretation. (Forte and
Kerman both do other interesting things with these verbs.)
44. "An den Meisterwerk nur teilzuhaben ist ein wahreres Leben, als sich in Nichterfullung zu vergeuden. In diesem Sinne ist das Meisterwerk der einzige Weg
fur alle, die nicht berufen sind." Das Meisterwerk in der Musik, I, "Vorwort."
45. A few acknowledgements are due, beyond those already made: to Marion A.
Guck, for extensive comparison of notes about passing tones; and, for various
contributions (including gracious acceptance of rehearsals of this essay in the
guise of conversation), to Nadine Hubbs and to the members of my Schenker
seminar at the University of Pittsburgh: Deborah Barber, Lars Br0ndum, John
Marcinizyn, Yong Yang, and especially Iris Berent.

340

