Yale University Department of Music

Ernst Oster (1908-1977) In Memoriam
Author(s): Allen Forte, Milton Babbitt, Charles Burkhart, Clemens Sandresky, Carl Schachter,
Blanche W. Beck, Sydney Beck, David Beach, John Rothgeb, Edward Laufer
Source: Journal of Music Theory, Vol. 21, No. 2 (Autumn, 1977), pp. 340-354
Published by: Duke University Press on behalf of the Yale University Department of Music
Stable URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/843494
Accessed: 15/12/2009 12:43
Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of JSTOR's Terms and Conditions of Use, available at
http://www.jstor.org/page/info/about/policies/terms.jsp. JSTOR's Terms and Conditions of Use provides, in part, that unless
you have obtained prior permission, you may not download an entire issue of a journal or multiple copies of articles, and you
may use content in the JSTOR archive only for your personal, non-commercial use.
Please contact the publisher regarding any further use of this work. Publisher contact information may be obtained at
http://www.jstor.org/action/showPublisher?publisherCode=duke.
Each copy of any part of a JSTOR transmission must contain the same copyright notice that appears on the screen or printed
page of such transmission.
JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide range of
content in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and facilitate new forms
of scholarship. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.

Duke University Press and Yale University Department of Music are collaborating with JSTOR to digitize,
preserve and extend access to Journal of Music Theory.

http://www.jstor.org

ERNST OSTER (1908-1977) IN MEMORIAM

I first met Ernst Oster in 1956, through Milton Babbitt.
We became very close friends, and I enjoyed the relationship
for some twenty-one years. Perhaps enjoyed is not the most
appropriate term, for to be Ernst's friend meant sharing his
troubles. One of these was lack of professional recognition.
Only in recent years was he able to function as a teacher
within an academic setting. Until that time he was denied
access to a world that should have been his natural habitat:
. I have constant trouble with pupils, of one sort or
another. That's how it is if one is a private teacher and
does not have a great reputation. [E.O. to A.F., November
12, 1965.1
A few friends attempted to find him a position whenever an
opportunity arose:
He is a cultivated and intelligent man, humane, sensitive,
and with qualities ofgraciousness which are all too rare these
days. . . . His intimate familiary with Schenker's work

and his extraordinary musical intelligence make him the
foremost expert in that area of theory, without question.
340

The response to this particulareffort:
I am sure that Oster should be able to find a position
which would be compatible with his special interests and
achievements.
Oster did indeed find a position compatible with his special
interests and achievements, thanks to Gunther Schuller, at
the New England Conservatory. Subsequently he obtained
another part time appointment, at the Mannes College of
Music. In both institutions he was able to have contact with a
far larger number of students than in the past. The appointment to the Mannes faculty was particularlygratifying to him
because of his previous negative experience with that school,
which had been mainly responsible for the transmission of
Schenker's ideas to this country:
But it would look somewhat strange if I should show up,
contributing to the scholarship fund of a school that has
continuously barred me from teaching there, and more.
[E.O. to A.F. after receiving notice of a benefit concert
at Mannes, December 1, 1967.]
Uppermost in his mind over the years was the disposition
of the Schenker materials that he had rescued in 1939 from
the European holocaust. Also very important to him was the
dissemination in English translation of Schenker'smajorwork,
Der freie Satz, a project in which I became deeply involved.
Having completed the rough draft of my translation on
February 4, 1959, but having had no success in my attempt
to find a publisher, I turned the material over to Oster in
1962 in the knowledge that he was the best possible person
to continue what, to me, had become an impossible undertaking:
. . . I think it would only be correct if I gave you something in writing as a kind of receipt for your translation;
perhaps it should include also for what purpose you'll
give it to me. [E.O. to A.F., November 20, 1962.]
Oster believed, with some justification, that certain people
were opposed to the publication of the English translation
of Freier Satz. At one point he wrote a long letter to me in
341

which he set forth arguments to be presented to publishers in
rebuttal of the opposition by these people, who had not done
anything to further publication of Schenker's originalwritings:
That it was [Oswald]

Jonas . . . who made possible the

second edition of D. f S., ... that it was you and I and
[Robert Owen] Lehman who made the translation possible. [E.O. to A.F., July 2, 1966.]
(Robert Owen Lehman had given Oster a grant of $4500 in
1963 to support his work on the translation of Derfreie Satz.)
The difficulty of completing the translation caused Oster
considerable anguish. He was especially concerned about the
capabilities of persons who might be asked by potential
publishers to evaluate the translation. On the matter of
judging, he wrote:
As a matter of fact, very few people could, such as you, or
Milton [Babbitt] or [William J.] Mitchell. [E.O. to A.F.,
May 2, 1966.]
The Freier Satz project was not, however, the most
important task in Oster's opinion:
I sometimes really feel that, having all those unpublished
analyses available would be almost as important as all of
Schenker's published books together. [E.O. to A.F.,
October 13, 1966, on applying for a Guggenheim Fellowship (not awarded).]
Certainly no one was as well qualified to edit the unpublished
manuscripts. He knew that:
But one thing that worries me also is that absolutely
nobody, not even you or Milton [Babbitt] can have the
faintest idea of how long it all takes. [E.O. to A.F., September 23, 1968.]
And there was the constant conflict between his teaching
responsibilities and his commitment to prepare the Schenker
sketches for publication:
Editing the fugue of op. 106 could take me a few months
of almost uninterrupted work. It has to be done, and if
342

I don't do it, who will? [E.O. to A.F., October 11, 1964.]
His work as a teacher, however, was of utmost significance
to him, despite his complaints about students' preparation
and about their pedagogues:
. . .students-if

one has them!-with

their openmindedness

and their desire to learn and their desire for something that
rings true. But how does one get students if the older
musicians do not know, don't want to follow, and cannot
distinguish? [E.O. to A.F., March2, 1969.]
Although he was constantly involved in it, his original work
often took a secondary position to his other activities-in
large part because of the extraordinary physical strain, after
1967, of commuting from New York to Boston each week. It
is in this original work, however, that the splendid quality of
his mind is most evident. It is a pity that we have only a few
published articles. Even a project of relatively modest scale
engaged his complete concentration, as indicated by this excerpt concerning his contribution to an Analysis Symposium
in this journal (on Mozart's D major Menuet, K.576b):
So I looked at the piece right away and found that most of
it was not clear to me at all. I had jotted down a few notes
years ago but they were of hardly any help. So I got stuck
with the piece and stared at it last night till about 2 a.m.,
with the result that things began taking shape in my mind.
I find it surprisingly difficult ....
[E.O. to A.F., November 5, 1965.]
Oster was a profoundly serious person, one who did not
suffer fools gladly. He had an incredible capacity for sustained
intellectual activity, even as he passed middle age. He was also
aware of his abilities as they compared with those of other
persons who were known for their work in Schenkerian
analysis:
What I do when I work is (of course you know) to constantly listen to the composition: does it sound this way,
or that way? No, this is not really in keeping with what the
piece sounds like-but what else? And then: Why did the
composer write the way he did, what were his motivations,
343

what is "the idea"? I don't regret working this way. To me
it is the only way of going about it, and: this is the way I
have "learned" and develop mentally, and it is the reason
why I am "better" than "they". [E.O. to A.F., March 2,
1959.]

When one considers his achievements, his teaching, his
work on the Schenker materials, and his special original
contributions, there is an impression that the life was a fruitful one, although often unhappy. There remains, however, a
certain feeling of bitterness toward those who offered only
opposition to his attempts to find support for his work, opposition that sometimes created in him a feeling of helplessness:
I really think I have not much of a chance there: the senior
fellowship for which I am applying is "designated as for
individuals of already distinguished accomplishments in the
humanities." [E.O. to A.F., October 13, 1966 concerning
his application to the National Endowment for the Humanities.]
With the death of Ernst Oster an era in the history of
music theory in this country comes to an end, an era in which
Schenker's ideas gradually received a wider acceptance. Perhaps this in itself may serve as a tribute to the life of a scholar
of the highest rank, an individual of already distinguished
accomplishments.
Allen Forte
July 10, 1977

Over the, at least, three decades during which Ernst and I
were friends, there were times when we spoke at least once a
day, and there were periods of weeks, or-occasionallymonths when we happened to speak not at all, simply because
our conversations seemed to demand an occasion, an event,
although our talks would have appeared eventful only to very
few, even of our colleagues. For, although the objects of our
discussions ranged from "A-sharps" to perfidious editors,
whereof two mutually felt they could not speak, thereof two
344

remained silent. And I early lost all temptation to broach the
subject of "contemporary music," particularly of that which
meant and means so much to me, perhaps when I heard Ernst
discuss contemporary performances (of music of the past)
thoughtfully, concernedly, and specifically, for all that I
easily could claim exemption from that activity. Or, perhaps,
it was when Ernst told me of having taken refuge in the hills
around Berlin, in 1937 or 1938, to find the space and privacy
to spread out and study the "Figuren und Urlinientafeln" of
Schenker's Eroica analysis, an activity even more hazardous
then than now. Why should I have added to the environmental anguish of his times and places that he ever appeared
to be suffering an additional straw of personal and professional discomfort? But when we spoke of music, with the
score in front of us, or in front of him at the piano, of that
music which meant so much to him, he talked and played
with that scrupulous, distinguished, enthusiastic intensity
with which he taught and wrote, inspiring others by being
anything but overtly inspirational,leading others while assuming none of the postures of the leader.
Although now I shall be obliged to learn from him only by
rereading those rare articles, I know I shall continue to learn
from him, from those articles and from his example: his
presences in his absence.
Milton Babbitt
July 12, 1977

My friend and teacher Ernst Oster was totally uninterested
in music theory. He was interested in music. He applied
theory (Schenker's theory) to the analysis of musical compositions. Unlike a theorist or a historian (though his knowledge
of history was profound), he always focussed upon the specific, not the general. Like a performer or a composer-which
is to say, like an artist-he was always most concerned with
the individual work and what made that work different from
all others. And only an artist of the most authentic gifts
could discern the artistic content of a work as did he.
To Ernst, the occurrence of a particular voice-leading
345

technique in one Mozart sonata could be quite a different
thing from its occurrence in another. The important thing was
how it was used; it was a question of evaluation. This makes
him, I suppose, a kind of "critic"-though the term was one
he had little use for. Indeed, the field of music, as customarily
compartmentalized, lacks the notion of this sort of critic-the
sort, so well known in the field of literature, who reveals the
meaning of the art work through analysis. The literary critic
does so through an essay, through the written word. But the
musical critic is much less satisfactorily served by the medium
of words, perhaps because words are so antithetical to the
nature of music. At any rate, this medium was a difficult one
for Ernst Oster, and he wrote little. But he was the most
prolific, most generous, and most giving of "critics" in his
teaching. His true medium was the lesson-the "session"and it was here, seated at the piano with one or more students, that his gifts were revealed and the richness of his
insights imparted in the highest degree. And the goal, the
point of it all, was not only a heightened consciousness of the
work's content (as it is for the literary critic), but was alsoas it was for Schenker-a more aware, more enlightened,
performance.
It was music that Ernst Oster loved and uncompromisingly
served in the most selfless manner. And it was music that he
revealed to those fortunate enough to know him. We dwell in
a poorer land, now-that he is gone.
Charles Burkhart
July 9, 1977

Ernst Oster had the good fortune not only to have extraordinary musical sensitivity and intelligence, but he was also the
most dedicated and uncompromising kind of scholar. The
strength of his insights and beliefs in the theories of Heinrich
Schenker sustained him through a lifetime of many disappointments and frustrations as he worked tirelessly to promote the profound understanding of music that was his.
He seemed to ask little from life but a love for music on
the highest level both for himself and for others. Most of his
346

years were lonely, as Schenker's thoughts were first disregarded and then, to Ernst's great distress, misinterpreted. It
is everyone's loss that his audience was always so small, for
he was a rare friend of music and a gentle and devoted friend
to those who knew him.
Clemens Sandresky
July 13, 1977

Shortly after Ernst Oster joined the faculty of The Mannes
College of Music, he suggested that we get together for an
evening to talk over a piece of music. The piece we settled on
was Beethoven's beautiful little Bagatelle, Opus 119, No. 11.
Ernst agreed with many of my ideas about the piece, but said
that he had a few of his own that he would like to discuss
with me. His "few ideas" involved virtually every aspect of
the Bagatelle, from its form and large-scaletonal structure to
the tiniest details of voice leading and of rhythm; we must
have spent three hours discussing them. I would like to share
one of these ideas with the readers of JMT as my contribution to these memorial papers.
I had mentioned to Ernst that the anticipation on the last
eighth note of bar 3 (Example 1) reminded me of a beautiful
and little known idea of Schenker's: that anticipations in
keyboard music are often intended by the composer to simulate the effect of a vocal portamento; in such cases, the performer must use the strictest legatissimo touch. A "vocal"
style of performance would, of course, be particularly suitable for this Bagatelle, where Beethoven twice writes "cantabile." Ernst agreed, but asked if I had also considered the
possibility that the sixteenth-note passage in bar 10 (Example
2a) might be heard as the fantastic elaboration of another
anticipation approached by a portamento. The goal tone,
E-flat3, arrives before the downbeat, more or less as in the
reduction of Example 2b; therefore, it is anticipated. And the
passage leading up to E-flat3, with its strange contour, odd
repetitions, and unusual emphases on chromatic passing
tones, represents a vocal slide, not merely simulated on the
piano, but translated into the idiom of keyboard figuration.
347

ant.

4^:r er^cVr
Example 1

10

f

vps~~

ret

cantobile
f~nmolto

.J)~p

Example2a

ant

,o

r~

r2b
i
2b

10-11

J

bb

22
becomes

2c

348

To perceive the passage in this way gives a much deeper meaning to the molto cantabile that follows and that forms the
emotional climax of the piece. And, indirectly, it influences
one's conception of the Bagatelle as a whole. For the molto
cantabile passage gives definition and emphasis to a crucial
place in the large-scale melodic structure.* In addition, as
Ernst pointed out, the last three notes of the little coda
reflect just these climactic bars, whose melodic outline appears in inversion, coming to rest on the tonic (Example 2c).
I am citing this particular insight of Ernst's because it
seems to me to typify an important facet of his musical
thought. He was not content with a merely correct theoretical
explanation of this strange passage;he looked for the compositional idea behind it and for the means the composer used
to make the passage sound convincing and beautiful. Ernst
brought to the analysis of music an artistic vision so penetrating and so comprehensive that it could bring together in a
single focus an element of voice leading (the anticipation), a
performance idiom (the portamento), the expressive character of the piece (the cantabile), the tonal structure, and the
form. It was this vision that made his analytic interpretations
at once personal and objectively compelling.
Ernst's musical accomplishments were remarkable. He had
thought through the possibilities of tonality from the simplest
relationships to the subtlest and most complex. He knew
countless pieces inside out-had mastered the available source
material, had worked out original and convincing ideas for
performance, and, most importantly, had arrived at conclusions about compositional issues whose very existence was
unknown to most other musicians. These accomplishments
represented hard-won victories, for they were achieved in the
face of an almost monumental pessimism and of one of the
gods' unkindest gifts-a talent for perceiving the problematic
and the contradictory that would have brought despair and
paralysis to a lesser man. That he achieved so much is truly
inspiring.

Carl Schachter
July 10, 1977

*The anticipation of E-flat3 also has a more direct bearing on the
melodic structure, but to explain it adequately would require the
format of a full-scale discussion of the piece.

349

With the death of Ernst Oster we have lost a beloved friend
and colleague. Music has lost a valued mentor. Ernst had a
rare reverence for his art and imbued his students with the
importance of the constant search for the innermost meaning
of the music they studied and performed. In a period when
the mastery of techniques is more common than penetration,
he gave the fortunate musicians who came in contact with
him learning and teaching experiences they got nowhere else.
One could not fail to be impressed with his seriousness of
purpose, his dedication, warmth, and honesty. Ernst loved his
students, especially the eager and industrious ones, and took a
personal interest in their broader development as artists. He
had no patience for those who closed their minds to the
teachings of Heinrich Schenker, of which he was a dedicated
exponent. His distress over the superficiality of much of the
current theoretical training and its reflection in performance,
and, more recently, over the ways of the publishing fraternity
in his attempts to get important Schenker documents printed,
undoubtedly took their toll.
Ernst was devoted to a few friends in whom he confided
and with whom he shared art and thought. Always willing to
help, seek or give advice when it was needed, he gave generously of himself, with all the humility and sincerity which
was characteristic of his nature. We remember him with love
and respect, and deeply mourn the loneliness of his passing.
Blanche W. Beck
Sydney Beck
July 14, 1977

It is not an exaggeration to say that Ernst Oster was one of
the great musical minds of our time. I consider myself extremely fortunate to have known him for several years, and
to have had the opportunity to study with him privately.
These studies have had a profound effect on my life: quite
naturally the pieces I studied with him have become the backhis
gone of my teaching repertoire; even more imnportantly,
insights into these and other works have altered my perspective toward music and its structure. I am also indebted to
350

Ernst for the advice he gave me in preparing two articles for
publication.
Ernst was a marvelous teacher. Not only did he have vast
knowledge of and about the tonal literature, but he also had
the special knack of making one understand exactly why he
interpreted a particular detail or larger idea in this or that
way. I often left my lessons with quite a different conception
of a piece than I had at the beginning, although in some instances the true significance of his ideas became apparent
only after considerable thought and work. Above all he
taught me that beauty and coherence in music exists at many
levels. Details are meaningful in themselves, but their true
and artistic significance depends upon their relationship to a
larger context.
Ernst was also a very demanding teacher and friend. He set
the same high standards for his students as he did for himself,
and was clearly disappointed on those occasions when his
expectations were not fulfilled. Recently I informed Ernst of
a public lecture I was preparingabout motivic relationships in
tonal music. One of the examples was taken from Tonwille
and another was a piece that I had studied with Ernst. To my
surprise Ernst was a bit angry about this, and in a subsequent
letter he expressed disappointment that I would rely so
heavily on ideas gleaned from others. At first I thought this
rather harsh, since there was much of my own thought involved as well. But then it occurred to me that Ernst was
simply prodding me to develop my own ideas to a greater
extent. After all, that is what he had done with his life. Although he had spent his entire adult life with Schenker's
theories, his greatest insights were his own. That is what
made him such a great man.
David Beach
July 12, 1977

I have had the good fortune to belong to a relatively small
group of professional musicians who, years after completing
doctoral degrees or passing comparable milestones, have continued to regard Ernst Oster not only as their friend but as
351

their teacher-a teacher whose capacity to communicate ever
deeper insights into the masterworks of which he himself
possessed such mastery seemed almost boundless.
Ernst Oster's brilliance as a musician and musical thinker
was obvious to anyone who followed his work, and especially
to those who enjoyed personal contact with him. Apart from
his extraordinary natural musical gifts, he had two qualities
which, I believe, were largely responsible for his great contribution to musical study.
The first was an unremitting self criticism in his approach
to musical problems. He would not compromise and accept
an "easy" or obvious solution. Typically, he wrote to me in a
letter of March, 1969:
"In the past ten or more days I've been working particularly hard on some "problem children," such as [among
others] Haydn, Sonata in E.flat, No. 52, development (got
it at last, I think, after decades) .... "
It will come as a surprise to many moderately advanced students that something in a piece by Haydn can be completely
understood only "after decades"; but so it was to a musician
of Ernst Oster's caliber and experience. In teaching, he was
never completely satisfied until he accomplished the almost
impossible task of demonstrating the superiority of a given
solution, of showing a given way of hearing to be necessary as
a result of the compositional premises of the work in question, rather than just "possible"; and he nearly always succeeded magnificently.
The second quality I want to mention, the one most
responsible for my personal debt to Ernst Oster as a teacher,
is his capacious generosity with his time and knowledge. My
correspondence with him spans a period of twelve years, and
in the scores of letters that we exchanged I assaulted him with
many musical questions large and small. There were hardly
any to which he did not send at once the most carefully considered response; and he often added further observations, as
they occurred to him, in immediately subsequent letters.
By his own example, Ernst Oster made the analysis of
music far more difficult than it is normally considered to be.
I hope that in spite of its obvious practical disadvantageshis
352

way of thinking about music will prevail in the years ahead,
and that future generations of scholars will derive instruction
and inspiration from his published work as I and many of my
colleagues have done.
John Rothgeb
July 12, 1977
Because we, my wife and I, loved him so much, we shall
grieve so much for him. He was one of the greatest musicians
I have known, a marvellous teacher whose classes and lessons
were enthralling and moving experiences; he was the true key
to the depths of beauties of the great classical literature. He
was my most beloved musical friend, to whom I owe the best
that I know and understand of music.
We are fortunate to have even a few published articles. In
the last years his exhausting teaching schedule at the New
England Conservatory and at Mannes left him little occasion
to think about musical questions of special interest to him;
and he would complain of the enormous amount of time
needed to write an article. He felt uncomfortable writing
about music, in English, and really believed he could hardly
do it, though of course he did it splendidly. There are only
the articles on Register, the Mozart Minuet, and the reply to
Travis (in this Journal); and on the Egmont Overture and
Moonlight Sonata (in Musicology). When I once mentioned
to him an early article in Der Dreiklang he brushed it off: "I
was a different person then." For in his thorough study of
and humility towards the music of the great masters, he could
return again and again to, say, a Mozart passage which others
might suppose simple, could think about, for years, a problematic Beethoven passage, always looking for the "idea." In
this sense, constantly growing, he was always a different person.
For him, the masterworks of the classical repertoire belonged to the supreme achievements of humanity altogether,
masterpieces from a golden age, not to be equated with any
other music whatever. He was very pessimistic about the
future of that music, the real understanding of which may
now be in danger of being irretrievably lost; and he couldn't
353

stand the way most people performed: without understanding, mechanically, impersonally, superficially, with arbitrary
"expressiveness." Neither could he, the greatest exponent of
Schenker's thought, tolerate the self-styled and pseudo"Schenkerists," who damage Schenker's cause and musical
understanding by dishonestly cribbing from Schenker, by
irresponsible "adaptations" and misconstructions of Schenker's ideas. His analyses were works of imagination and art,
at one with the music. Voice-leading sketches were only a
necessary technicality: one had to go beyond these, to the
essential musical idea behind the work, to how the idea was
expressed, to the reasons why the composer chose such and
such a procedure. These were foremost; and his profound
insight into compositional questions bespoke that genius
which comprehends genius on the highest level. I shall never
forget a lesson on a certain Brahms work, feeling-overwhelmed-to have come as close as ever I might to the technical and spiritual infinitude of greatness in music. A few
notes played in illustration possessed a unique, inimitable
beauty, and somehow, even his thoughtful silence illuminated.
How often over the years did I go up the stairway to his
small apartment, see him waiting by the door with his warm
smile, go in, to talk about music, about personal and everyday
matters, to laugh and joke (for he had a tremendous humorous side), and maybe later to "go eating," as he called it. Just
to telephone and chat was to be reassured that in a hollow,
unconcerned world, he was still there. Too painful never to
repeat these experiences, more than painful to know that he
just isn't there. The inspiration of his being will still be with
us, but we shall never approach it.
We look forward to the appearance of his translation of
Der freie Satz.
A tribute to this great musician and friend might be: not
to try to do as he did (we cannot), but somehow to stand for
what he stood for, seeking what he sought, mindful of his
humility and devotion to his art. This we owe not only to
Ernst Oster but to the art of music.
Edward Laufer
July 10, 1977

354

