Yale University Department of Music

The Real Relationship between Kirnberger's and Rameau's "Concept of the Fundamental Bass"
Author(s): Cecil Powell Grant, Kirnberger, Jean-Philippe Rameau
Source: Journal of Music Theory, Vol. 21, No. 2 (Autumn, 1977), pp. 324-338
Published by: Duke University Press on behalf of the Yale University Department of Music
Stable URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/843493
Accessed: 15/12/2009 12:43
Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of JSTOR's Terms and Conditions of Use, available at
http://www.jstor.org/page/info/about/policies/terms.jsp. JSTOR's Terms and Conditions of Use provides, in part, that unless
you have obtained prior permission, you may not download an entire issue of a journal or multiple copies of articles, and you
may use content in the JSTOR archive only for your personal, non-commercial use.
Please contact the publisher regarding any further use of this work. Publisher contact information may be obtained at
http://www.jstor.org/action/showPublisher?publisherCode=duke.
Each copy of any part of a JSTOR transmission must contain the same copyright notice that appears on the screen or printed
page of such transmission.
JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide range of
content in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and facilitate new forms
of scholarship. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.

Duke University Press and Yale University Department of Music are collaborating with JSTOR to digitize,
preserve and extend access to Journal of Music Theory.

http://www.jstor.org

THE REAL RELATIONSHIP
BETWEEN
KIRNBERGER'SAND RAMEAU'S
CONCEPTOF THE FUNDAMENTALBASS

Cecil Powell Grant
It is ironic that the very theoretical precept for which
Rameauis perhapsbest known remainstoday
Jean-Philippe
his most seriouslymisunderstood
theory: the concept of the
fundamentalbass. Part of the problemis that this bass, as
Rameauconceivedit, is not merelyan inflexible,mechanical
procedureas some believe,but a generalhypothesisby which
he can demonstratehis own unique harmonicperspective,
composed as it is of a wide varietyof speculativepresumptions and ideals. Hence, while Rameau routinely uses the
fundamental bass to reduce literal pitches to a tertiary
there are many instanceswhere he reachesbearrangement,
yond the written score with it, seekingto establishby inference the aural or logical implicationsof a passagein terms
consistent with the perspectiveof his system. In the following excerpt from The Theoryof Harmony,MatthewShirlaw
accurately distinguishesbetween the literal and inferential
of
bassin Rameau's
work.
application the fundamental
Strictly speaking,the FundamentalBassof Rameauis of
more than one kind. There is the fundamental
basswhich
is the direct resultof his theory of the inversionof chords,
324

and which has been in practical use in nearly every textbook of harmony since his time. This bass, which always
represents the fundamental note of the harmony, is to be
distinguished from the actual bass, the basso continuo, in
which the bass note may have the Third, Fifth, etc., of the
chord. But admirable and useful as this bass may be, the
species of Fundamental Bass which Rameau evolves in
Book II. of the Traite de l'harmonie is even more important. By it Rameau endeavors to explain, on logical and
scientific grounds, the laws which govern harmonic succession. A real science of harmony, Rameau perceives, must
not be satisfied with the explanation of chords as isolated
entities; it must also take into account harmonic succession; it must try to discover the underlying principles which
govern the progressions from one harmony to another, and
which render these intelligible.'
Shirlaw concludes his discussion of the latter use of the
fundamental bass by illustrating it with an example drawn
from Rameau's own Traite de l'harmonie.
Even in cases where the Fundamental Bass is not present,
it will nevertheless be understood; as in the following passage from Zarlino [see Example 1] .2
Past and present writers who have discussed such inferential fundamental analyses have lumped them all under the
term "interpolated bass." While this term correctly denotes
their use of imaginary or unsounded notes, it does not adequately distinguish between the various applications of the
technique by Rameau and others. A more precise representation of such analyses may be made by recognizing two
major categories within the "interpolated bass" concept.
The first of these is illustrated by the example quoted
above in the Shirlaw excerpt. That analysis presumes that an
incomplete chord need not lose its identity even when the
absent note happens to be its root. While the literal pitches
of the penultimate chord in Zarlino's example would seem to
limit it to no more than an inverted diminished triad on the
leading tone, Rameau sees and hears for this chord a dominant
function. For this reason, he selects the dominant note as the

325

I--

4

-X

-j

Zarlino'sexample
.

Fundamental
Bass added

i-y

Ir

I.

I

J

1

7

7

LtPerfectCadence
Example 1

Fundamental
Bass

Example 2

BassoContinuo '
6

6
Z

Bass;
Fundamental

326

E'

0

I J

Y

6
5
A

j

?

7

Example 3

7

I

11

chord's true root. This type of analysis represents an extension of the theory of inversion to those cases where inverted chords, instead of having their lowest note transferred
to an upper part, are allowed to omit this note entirely while
still retaining their identity as inversions. Such missing roots
could no more accurately be described as added or "interpolated" than could those of other inverted chords; on the
contrary, these roots are assumed to be ever present although
identifiable only through the harmonic context. Hence the
term "implied" fundamental note may be more appropriate
to such cirumstances.
A considerably more esoteric application of the same
technique appears in an excerpt from an example in Book III
of Rameau's Traite, given in Example 2.3 In this case, Rameau
views the F major triad as relinquishingits subdominant root
to the supertonic upon its repetition after [A], presumably
in order to progress more smoothly and convincingly to the
succeeding dominant seventh chord on G. He thus proposes
that the second of the two F chords be heard as a seventh
chord spelled on D, occurring here in first inversion on F
with its root suppressed. This particular analysis may appear
more arbitraryto modern observers than the preceding one,
since it does not seem as clearly specified or required by the
harmonic context as does Zarlino's progression. It may be,
however, that this reaction is partly conditioned by current
analytic practice, which readily accepts the leading tone
triad as a dominant component while tending towards a more
literal view of the subdominant triad. While we today might
challenge Rameau's prerogative to change the root of a repeated chord, we must remember that he is biased specifically towards hearing chordal root successions by the intervals
of the fifth or third whenever possible; that is certainly not
impossible in the progression of the chords at [A] in Example
2, and in that sense Rameau's application of such an analysis
to the subdominant chord is not necessarily more abstract
than one involving the leading tone triad.
It must be acknowledged that Rameau adopts a far more
radical procedure in analyses such as that in Example 3 of
which there are numerous instances in his Traite.4 For this
type of analysis the term "interpolated" bass seems entirely
327

suitable, since Rameau here willfully inserts a new chord on
the half note marked "Y" in a progression which otherwise
indicates harmonic movement by whole note only. The goal
of this analysis seems identical to that of the preceding example, that is, the conversion of the undesirable bass progression by ascending second into a more acceptable one by third
and fifth. Unlike the case in Example 2, however, Rameau
cannot achieve the desired result in Example 3 by interpreting
one chord as a disguised surrogate for another; he achieves it
instead by deciding that what appears to be a single chord
may be heard as two separate chords. This technique cannot
be viewed as an extension of the theory of inversion, but
represents the more daring proposition that a fundamental
bass analysis may determine a greater number of chords
than are readily apparent in the score. Rameau seems uncomfortable with the artificial interruption of the harmonic
rhythm that such insertions often produce. He eventually
finds a solution for this situation more satisfactory to him
in his theory of the "dual usage" (double emploi) of dissonance, which permits one to imagine the simultaneous occurrence of both the sounded and interpolated bass notes, and
allows one to adopt that which best suits the convenience of
the progression at hand.
Whatever distinctions in terminology or usage one may
determine for such fundamental bass analyses, it is certain
that they represent far more than a mere reduction of chordal
tones to an arrangementin thirds. Indeed, they prove beyond
doubt that abstract considerations were an integral part of
Rameau's concept of the fundamental bass from its inception.
Johann Philipp Kimberger, the leading theorist of the
Berlin school of the late eighteenth century, regarded his
work as the theoretical antithesis of Rameau's ideas. Yet it
is a fact that Kirnbergerinherited from Rameau his concept
of the fundamental bass, as well as many other parts of his
theoretical system. Any review of Kirnberger'swork should
take into account his habit of collaborating with others in
producing his treatises without acknowledging their contribution in print. His favorite and ablest collaborator was
his pupil, Johann Abraham Peter Schulz. A consideration
of Schulz's influence is especially relevant to studying the
328

various styles of fundamental bass analyses appearing in the
treatises published under Kirnberger'sname.
In works produced with little or no assistance from
Schulz, including the first volume of the compendious Die
Kunst des reinen Satzes in der Musik, the fundamental bass
analyses of the inferential type belong mainly to the implied
bass category identified above. Conspicuous among these is
exactly the same interpretation of the leading tone triad progressing to the tonic chord adopted earlier by Rameau, as
illustrated in Example 4.5
In addition, this becomes Kirnberger's standard method
for demonstrating in the Kunst and elsewhere that every
seventh chord whose apparent bass note ascends by step will
similarly find its real, albeit invisible, fundamental note a
third below its written bass note. Example 5, taken from the
Kunst, establishes the model for such circumstances.6 In
applying this technique to seventh chords, Kirnbergergoes a
significant step beyond Rameau, who could permit such an
analysis only for simple triads.7
In those of Kimberger's treatises to which Schulz contributed significantly, including Die wahren Grundsatze zum
Gebrauch der Harmonie, one may observe a more varied use
of inferential-type fundamental bass analyses. First, adoption
of the implied fundamental at the under-thirdfor the leading
tone triad, illustrated above in Example 4, is routinely applied to triads similarly progressing 'by ascending second,
regardless of their scalar seat. A favorite object of this procedure is the subdominant chord progressing upwards to the
dominant triad, as in Example 6 at [*].8
Secondly, the Harmonie contains many examples of the
true interpolated bass technique, with its insertion of whole
new chords between those apparent in the score. In Example
7, one finds intact Rameau's application of this technique to
any triad ascending by step.9
Whereas Rameau confines his use of the interpolated
bass technique to relatively select cases, Kirnberger and
Schulz apply this solution to a wide range of progressionsin
the Harmonie. Among these are a host of dissonant to dissonant, consonant to consonant, and dissonant to consonant
chordal successions whose common feature is a progression
329

[Fundamental
Bass] 1\:

11

rf-

Example 4

8

8"118
<

?

7

o

:

Bass]
[Fundamental

7

'

1 ..

9
7

'--

iv.

a
8

?

?

I7.

o

9

9
7

I?o I " i1? I-- I? !
Example 5

7

rr

J

?

7

7t

r

[Fundamental
Bass] I\'1

J

]

[*]
Example 6

8

[Fundamental
Bass] 1':

J

b7

7

It

330
Example 7

r

r

I .,

?
#

I

II

that appears to violate the axioms of chordal progression or
dissonance treatment established by the Kirnberger-Schulz
system. The interpolated bass allows the authors of the
Harmonie to bring these progressions into conformity with
their relevant norms. The following excerpt, for example,
grants to an irregularly resolved seventh chord its proper
resolution.
When great harmonists wish to express something vehemently or to surprise the listener, they take the liberty of
eliding entirely the resolution of the essential seventh;
. . .Hence instead of this passage [Example 8] and its
inversions, one often finds the following passages [Example 9]. In all these passages, the resolution of the essential
seventh is elided, and the fundamental harmony is to be
understood as [shown in Example 10].10
It is reasonable to conclude that both this adoption of
Rameau's true interpolated bass technique and the extended
use of the implied bass note type in the Harmonie may be
credited to Schulz's influence upon Kirnberger'swork. While
this development may reflect Schulz's greater susceptibility
to Rameau's influence, it in no way contradicts Kirnberger's
perspective as earlier articulatedin the Kunst. On the contrary,
the following excerpt from the Kunst invites such interpolations, especially when compared with the preceding quotation from the Harmonie.
Thirdly, the resolution of the seventh can actually be
elided, i.e., the consonant chord originating from its resolution can be omitted, and another dissonant chord can
be taken whose dissonance would have been prepared by
the omitted chord. So instead of this passage [Example
11] one may take this one [Example 12] through the
elision of the consonant chord indicated with *."
The controversy over the propriety of inferential fundamental bass analyses seems to have originated with the
theorist Wilhelm Friedrich Marpurg, Kirnberger's chief detractor and ideological opponent in Berlin. Marpurgregarded
himself as the official interpreterand disseminatorof Rameau's
theories in Germany; from that perspective he pronounces
331

?

r

B,

7

f

f

v9:

Example 8

Example 9
7

vI

7
tt

I 11J
J

I

Example 10

i

a

!t..'

2

6

6

Ir

v2

r,

*

Example 11

P

"

8

6

2
v-4:

0

8

,0

332
Example 12

IL

Kirnberger's system a distorted version of Rameau's original
theories. Marpurg attached to his Versuch uber die musikalische Temperatur a lengthy appendix entitled Anhang uber
den Rameau- und Kirnbergerschen Grundbass, the chief
purpose of which is publicly to discredit Kirnbergerand his
adherents in their use of the fundamental bass for inferential
analyses. As is generally recognized today, however, Marpurg
inadequately comprehended many of Rameau's ideas, and
modified them to suit his own purposes. Among these certainly must be included Rameau's concept of the fundamental
bass, as the following excerpt from the Anhang clearly shows:
Mr. Rameau indicates by the word fundamental bass a
bass which is nothing more than the raw fundamental
chords of the miscellaneous chords contained in the
thoroughbass of a piece, exhibited without the slightest
connection among themselves. I say without the slightest
connection because in the exposition of the fundamental
chords the manner of their progression is not taken into
consideration; rather, each single chord of the thoroughbass is merely reduced to its fundamental chord.12
Here Marpurg specifically denies Rameau's use of the
fundamental bass for any purpose other than the literal
tertiary reduction of individual chords. Not only does he
thereby misrepresent Rameau, but Marpurg could scarcely
utter a more telling indictment of his inaccurate knowledge
of Rameau's system and goals. A theme common to all of
Rameau's theoretical works is the search for the proper relationship among chords. With concepts such as string division, the sonorous body (corps sonore), the triple and quintuple progressions, and the dual usage of dissonance, to
mention but a few, Rameau tirelessly seeks to prove intervallic
norms for the fundamental bass progressions of musical
practice. Hence Marpurg's false attribution of a random
succession to Rameau's fundamental bass classically illustrates
his gross misperception of the Frenchman's theoretical perspective, and shows how ill-fated was Rameau to have such
a person as defender and explicator of his theories.
On the basis of his own restricted definition of the fundamental bass, however, Marpurg attacks Kirnberger'smore
333

flexible application of the concept as follows:
Since Kirnberger'sfundamental bass mainly depends upon
the extractor's himself composing and substituting his
personal whims for the thoughts of the composer, instead
of breaking down the existing tonal fabric and reducing
the given construction to its simple elements, so might
Kimberger's fundamental bass be termed not a true
fundamental bass, but an interpolated-bass.13
In so chastising Kirnbergerfor reaching beyond the written
score in fundamental bass analyses, Marpurg
remains oblivious
to Rameau's frequent use of the same technique.
Marpurg'scredibility for making such criticisms is additionally shaken by statements like the following one:
Even if the inventor of the fundamental bass, Mr. Rameau
himself, should have made such attempts here and there,
and reduced whole pieces to a fundamental bass, I myself
would be the first to reproach him on this account.14
This cryptic remark informs us that Marpurg'sfirst priority
is the expression of his own perceptions, not the promotion
of Rameau's ideas in purest form. If Marpurg sincerely believed that Rameau did not regularlyaccompany whole pieces
or major musical excerpts with fundamental bass analyses,
then he cannot have had much familiarity with Rameau's
treatises, in which such analyses are common.15 This would
certainly cast serious doubts upon his competence to evaluate
other writers in terms of their fidelity to Rameau. If, on the
other hand, one may infer from the last quotation above that
Marpurgseems to know more about this than he will admit,
and that he chooses to view any such occurrences as irrelevant
to Rameau's perspective, one may conclude that Marpurg
has adjusted Rameau's theory of the fundamental bass to suit
his own taste while cloaking the resulting form in the original
authority of Rameau. Whatever his motivation, there is no
disputing that Marpurghimself is guilty of the very eclecticism
towards Rameau of which he accuses others.
Marpurg's false conclusions about Rameau's use of the
fundamental bass might remain merely an innocuous bit of
historical irony had they died with him; unfortunately,
334

however, these errors have been inherited by modem writers.
In her article, "The Harmonic Theories of Kimberger and
Marpurg,"Joyce Mekeel affirms Marpurg'sconclusions in the
following selected remarks:
The last of Marpurg's theoretical works contains the
Anhang in which he discusses and attempts to refute Kirnberger's conception of the fundamental bass.. .. Marpurg
attacks Kirnbergerfor misunderstanding the nature of the
fundamental bass .... Kirnberger appears to use the funda-

mental bass to show the aural logic of a progression. This
is definitely outside the proper realm of the fundamental
bass as originally conceived by Rameau. Marpurgis quick
to seize on the error and to pronounce Kirberger's fundamental bass "not a real fundamental bass." ...

If Kirnberger does indeed regard his bass as "what the
French theorists call the fundamental bass," Marpurgcertainly has proved him to be in error.... The fundamental
bass, as originally conceived by Rameau, cannot contain
more than what is contained in the original example.
Therefore, in this sense Marpurgis correct when he calls
Kirnberger'sfundamental bass an "interpolated" bass...
Kirnbergeris in error in this instance....16
Perhaps Mekeel, like Marpurg,has overlooked occasions like
those illustrated above where Rameau uses the fundamental
bass as an interpretative or inferential device. It is ironic that
she has accepted Marpurg's opinions on this matter after
having explicitly warned us as follows about his unreliability
as a source for Rameau's ideas:
Friedrich Wilhelm Marpurg... regardedhimself as the first
disciple of Rameau in Germany .... This was most unfor-

tunate for Rameau, for Marpurgdid not understand the
full significance of Rameau's theories and, as we shall see,
questioned statements without having fully understood
their context.17
In his dissertation, "The Harmonic Theories of Johann
Philipp Kimberger," David Beach likewise adopts Marpurg's
view that Rameau's originaldefinition of the fundamental bass
precludes analysis by interpolated or inferential notes, as here:
335

As an avid supporter of Rameau's theories, it is only
natural that Marpurgwould be critical of Kirberger's use
of it [i.e., the fundamental bass], as well as the theories it
represents....
The reason that Marpurgsuggests the term "interpolated
bass" is that Kirnbergerindicates harmonies in the fundamental bass which are implied (at least to Kirnberger),but
not literally present in the music. . . . Considered from

Marpurg's point of view, he is certainly justified in this
characterization. ...

Marpurg's discontent seems to result

from the fact that Kirnbergerborrowed the term "fundamental bass" from Rameau without using it in the same
way ...
In the process of demonstrating that Kirnberger'sfundamental bass is not really a fundamental bass after all (at
least in Rameau's sense of the word), Marpurgaims most
of his criticisms at Harmonie.18
Although he defends Kirnberger's(or Schulz's) prerogative to
define the fundamental bass in his own way, Beach clearly
concurs with Marpurgthat Kirberger applies the fundamental bass in a manner never intended by Rameau. Perhaps
Beach was partly influenced towards this conclusion by
Mekeel's article, which is included in his bibliography.
The facts in this matter must now be established with
finality: Marpurg describes Rameau's fundamental bass
concept incompletely and inaccurately. By attempting to
protect this theory from all abstract considerations, Marpurg
actually pits Rameau against Rameau. Thus one may recognize in Marpurg and his.influence upon recent writers a far
greater threat to the survival of Rameau's complete fundamental bass concept than that posed by Kirnberger and
Schulz, whose version of the theory is essentially compatible
with the original model. The continuation of Marpurg'serror
is in several ways detrimental to our present knowledge of
the authors involved: it prevents our realizing that inferential harmonic analyses are a common link between the systems
of Kirnbergerand Rameau; and it limits our awareness of and
objective inquiry into aspects of Rameau's fundamental
bass speculations, the profoundly provocative qualities of
which have not yet been fully appreciated.
336

NOTES
Matthew Shirlaw, The Theory of Harmony (Dekalb, Illinois: B.
Coar, 1955), p. 98.
2. Ibid., p. 101. Shirlaw has extracted this example from Rameau's
Traite de l'harmonie, p. 58, meas. 1-3, and has reduced it from
open score.
3. Jean-Philippe Rameau, Traite de l'harmonie reduite d ses principes
naturels (Paris: J. B. C. Ballard, 1722), p. 195, meas. 1-3. The
example is simplified here by reduction from open score and
omission of numbers and voice labels in the upper parts.
4. Ibid., p. 212, meas. 1-3. Reduced from open score.
5. Johann Philipp Kirnberger, Die Kunst des reinen Satzes in der
Musik, 2 vols. (Vol. I, Berlin: C. F. Voss, 1771; Vol. II, Berlin
and K6nigsberg: Decker & Hartung, 1776-79), I, p. 70, meas. 1.
6. Ibid., I, p. 66.
7. For an explanation of the way in which Rameau's dissonance
theory prevents him from similarly applying such analyses to
seventh chords, see Cecil Powell Grant, "KirnbergerVersus Rameau:
Toward a New Approach to Comparative Theory," Ph.D. diss.,
Univ. of Cincinnati, 1976, pp. 198-200.
8. Johann Philipp Kirnberger, (Die wahren Grundsdtze zum Gebrauch
der Harmonie (Berlin: Decker & Hartung, 1773), p. 104, meas. 1.
9. Ibid., p. 52.
10. "Wenn grosse Harmonisten etwas heftiges ausdriicken, oder den
Zuhorer iiberraschen wollen, bedienen sie sich der Freiheit, die
Resolution der wesentlichen Septime ganz und gar zu iibergehen;
1.

. . So findet man oft statt dieses Ganges . . . und dessen Verwechselungen, folgende Ginge: . . . Bei allen diesen Gangen ist die

Resolution der wesentlichen Septime iibergangen, und die Grundharmonie ist wie ... zu verstehen" (ibid., pp. 38-39).
11. "Drittens kann so gar die Auflosung der Septime wiirklich iibergangen, das ist, der durch die Auflosung entstehende consonirende
Accord kann ausgelassen, und gleich ein andrer dissonirender
Accord genommen werden, dessen Dissonanz durch diesen ausgelassenen Accord ware vorbereitet worden. So kann man anstatt
diese Ganges durch Weglassung des mit * bezeichneten consoniren
Accordes, diesen nehmen" (Kirnberger, Kunst des reinen Satzes,
I, p. 85).
12. "Der Hr. Rameau bezeichnet durch das Wort Grundbass einen
Bass, welcher nichts weiter als die rohen Grundaccorde der in dem
Generalbass eines Tonstiicks enthaltnen vermischten Accorde ohne
die geringste Connexion unter sich darleget. Ich sage ohne die
geringste Connexion, weil bei der Darlegung der Grundaccorde
nichte auf die Art ihrer Fortschreitung unter sich Bedacht genommen, sondern jeder einzelne Accord des Generalbasses bloss in
seine Grundaccorde aufgeloset wird" (Wilhelm Friedrich Marpurg,

337

13.

14.

15.
16.
17.
18.

Versuch iiber die musikalische Temperatur [Berlin: J. F. Korn,
1776], p. 232).
"Da es bei dem Kirnbergerschen Grundbass hauptsachlich darauf
ankommt, dass der Extrahent selber componiret, und seine eigene
Einfalle den Gedanken des Tonsetzers substituiret, anstatt das
Vorhandne Tongewebe zu decomponiren, und die gegebnen Zusammensetzungen in ihre simple Elemente aufzulosen: so mochte
denn wohl der Kirnbergersche Grundbass kein eigentlicher Grundbass, sondern mit seinem wahren Nahmen ein Interpolirbass
sein" (ibid., p. 233).
"Sollte auch der Erfinder des Grundbasses, der Hr. Rameau selber,
hin und wieder dergleichen Versuche gemacht, und ganze Tonstiicke in einen Grundbass aufgeloset haben, so werde ich selber
der erste sein, der ihn desswegen tadeln wird" (ibid., p. 246).
See, for example, the seventy-odd measure original fugue, "Laboravi," so analyzed by Rameau in Book III of his Traite, pp. 341-55.
Joyce Mekeel, "The Harmonic Theories of Kirnberger and Marpurg," Journal of Music Theory, IV (1960), pp. 182-86 passim.
Ibid., p. 169.
David W. Beach, "The Harmonic Theories of Johann Philipp Kirnberger: Their Origins and Influences," Ph.D. diss., Yale University,
1974, pp. 95-96.

338

