Interactive data mining & machine learning techniques for
musicology
Knut Hartmann, Daniel Büchner, Axel Berndt, Andreas Nürnberger
Department of Computer Science, University of Magdeburg, Germany
{knut.hartmann, axel.berndt}@isg.cs.uni-magdeburg.de
nuernb@iws.cs.uni-magdeburg.de

Carsten Lange
Zentrum für Telemann-Pflege und -Forschung Magdeburg, Germany
carsten.lange@tz.magdeburg.de
In: K. Maimets-Volt, R. Parncutt, M. Marin & J. Ross (Eds.)
Proceedings of the third Conference on Interdisciplinary Musicology (CIM07)
Tallinn, Estonia, 15-19 August 2007, http://www-gewi.uni-graz.at/cim07/

Background in history of music. The German Baroque music composer Georg Philipp Telemann was one of the
most influential composers of his time with a large repertoire of musical styles. The reflection of musical influences of
Telemann on other composers and the detection of musical influences in Telemann's œuvre are interesting research
questions. Moreover, Telemann's approach to compositional problems, especially the treatment of the libretto in his
vocal work, has been intensively studied during the last years. All these open musicological questions raise the
demand for an extensive analysis of scores. Considering the pure amount of Telemann's œuvre and the multitude of
corpus analysis tasks, the contrastive analysis of domain experts should be supported by powerful and adaptable
software tools.
Background in computing, mathematics and statistics. Numerous algorithms were proposed to detect important
musical features (melody, rhythm and harmony) with data mining and machine learning techniques in large corpora of
scores. Moreover, the detection of melodic features often considers psychological theories on the reception of
melodies. But these automatic feature extraction techniques need an unambiguous and complete problem description.
A correct interpretation of musical phenomena, however, requires an in-depth knowledge of musical styles and
compositional rules within a specific period of time. Therefore, musical experts should be able (i) to construct their
corpus to be analyzed, (ii) to define queries which combine melodic, rhythmic, harmonic and lyrical aspects and (iii) to
correct and augment search results.
Aims. The Telemann Research Center hosts a large archive of partly unpublished and undated scores of Telemann
and a musicological library dedicated to the work of this composer. In a long-time effort, this corpus has been partly
transformed into an outdated symbolic representation. These scores had to be converted into a more flexible musical
notation (MusicXML). Moreover, flexible data mining algorithms had to be developed in order to extract those musical
features which are interesting for a musicological analysis. Finally, flexible and adaptable graphical interfaces should
support a contrastive analysis of large musical corpora. According to the main focus of this conference ‘singing’, the
paper focuses on problems related to the musical realization of the libretti (for instance, the musical treatment of
phrase endings in the vocal work of Telemann) and the detection of influences of ethnical and regional songs on
Telemann's work.

The German Baroque music composer Georg
Philipp Telemann (March 14, 1681 - June 25,
1767) wrote over 3,000 compositions. Sacred
music constitutes the biggest part of his
œuvre comprising over 1,700 cantatas, 16
masses, 23 psalms, 40 passion cantatas and
6 oratorios. For many compositions the dates
of origin and even the authorship are
unknown
or
at
least
questionable.
Musicological investigations try to find
answers
by
extensive
manual
corpus
analyses. Algorithmic music analysis and data
mining techniques are prospective tools to

facilitate this work. We will describe an
application scenario where these techniques
proved to be of value as efficient time-saving
tools in the research on Telemann’s sacred
music.

Problem Statement
Music analysis belongs to the armamentarium
of musicologists. It is essential for a deeper
understanding of the music of past epochs.
Moreover, it provides invaluable insights into
the development of today's music culture and

CIM07 - Conference on Interdisciplinary Musicology - Proceedings

listening consuetude. Musical styles and
stylistic devices that are omnipresent and
generally taken for granted in today's (e.g.,
western) music had to develop and establish
in the compositional practice and acceptance
of the audience—a process of centuries of an
ongoing musical change.

It is documented that Telemann got in touch
with Hanacic style elements during a journey
to Poland. Thus, the Lombardic rhythm, which
was only detected in Telemann’s music during
a limited creative period by the musicologist
Wolf Hobohm, can be used as an indication
for further undated pieces (Hobohm, 1983).
Therefore, of course, it should first be verified
in all dated pieces.

Of special musicological interest are those
composers that lived and worked in
transitional periods, because their music
reflects this stylistic change. One of them is
Georg Philipp Telemann. As one of the most
influential composers of his time, his œuvre
reflects the musical development from the
baroque to the classical period of European
music. But the big corpus of his compositions
is only partially utilizable for further
musicological investigations. Lots of arguable
dating and authorship assumptions have to
be clarified to provide a trustworthy solid
scientific basis.

Considering the very extensive amount of
compositions
that
Telemann’s
œuvre
comprises,
these
examples
give
an
impression of the time-consuming extent of
the corpus analysis work. Up to now it is
nearly impossible to cover complete corpora
(especially if they comprise more than one
composer). Musicology is forced to work in a
random sampling manner.
Accordingly, it is laborious and difficult to
formulate and investigate new hypotheses.
The expenditure of time prevents a
systematic exemplification, verification and
quantization
of
hypotheses
on
more
comprehensive corpora or the complete
amount of works of a composer.

Telemann's cantatas may be taken as an
example. It is supposed that some which are
currently ascribed to J.S. Bach are composed
by Telemann (Dürr, 1952). A contrastive
analysis of stylistic aspects (see Fleischhauer,
1963; Hirschmann, 1992 and Reipsch, 1998b)
can provide clues for a new evaluation of
authenticity and attribution. Considering the
correlation of compositional means to the
text, Telemann's musical affect treatment can
be a starting point for investigations (Lange,
2004).

Given
an
adequate
machine-readable
symbolic
representation
(e.g.,
MIDI,
MusicXML), computer-driven analysis and
data mining techniques could be able to
include the big amount of data/big corpora in
an analysis-run. In this way it can also be
possible to discover new stylistic features and
relationships between individuals within the
analysis set.

The fact that Telemann wrote his cantatas in
bigger consistent complexes each covering an
"ideal" year of 72 Sundays can be of further
help (Reipsch, 1998a). The trial of an
attribution within such a complex can provide
further hints.

These techniques of musical style analysis
have to incorporate harmonic, rhythmic,
motific/thematic, key signature/tonal and
contrapuntal features. These include aspects
of modulation, motif variation, the treatment
of dissonances, as well as phenomena of the
voice-leading and consequential relations
between parts.

The analysis of stylistic aspects and the
mutual influence of contemporary composers
and vogues furthermore give clues for the
dating of origin. From Telemann it is known
that he assimilated lots of cultural and
personal influences from his journeys and
correspondences in his own style. This is
documented in his reports and letters (e.g.,
Telemann, 1767). Together with further
contemporary sources the date of origin of
particular compositions can be limited.

Furthermore, the sung text/libretto and its
musical treatment give enlighting clues for
stylistic assignments. Here, the composers’
musical vocabulary correlates to non-musical
content and reveals his very specific personal
way of compositional treatment.
Most of these aspects require more than a
formal or statistical analysis. Ambiguity (e.g.,
during a harmonic modulation), motific

2

CIM07 - Conference on Interdisciplinary Musicology - Proceedings

Figure 1: Narmour patterns

relationship
and
singular
statistically
insignificant phenomena are usually beyond
the computational. But since these are the
compositional means to work out the innermusical structure—to accent and to catch the
attention of the audience—these are usually
the most important aspects for music
analysis. It requires the human selfconception of musical expressivity and the
interpretation of meaning. Thus, an automatic
music analysis cannot and should not replace
the musicologists’ manual analysis.

(Dowling, 1978). Therefore, the majority of
melody retrieval systems uses strong
abstractions of the melodic properties:
Direction of movements in the melody (Ghias
et al., 1995), the rhythm as absolute duration
(McNab et al., 1996) or relative to the meter
(Chai & Vercoe, 2002).
Melodies have often been used as examples
in the Gestalt theory. Meyer (1956)
suggested closures to explain organization
principles in melodies. Meyer’s theory inspired
Narmour’s
Implication-Realization
model
(Narmour, 1990; Narmour 1992) which is
based on closures—expectation of melodic
continuations. According to the Gestalt Law of
Good Continuation (Wertheimer, 1923) the
recognition of two similar or distinct elements
raises the expectation of a continued
similarity or variation. These elements can be
pitches, intervals or directions. Figure 1
presents some typical melodic patterns: The
continuation of pitches (duplicate), intervals
with a change in direction (intervallic
duplicate) or directions (process). The pattern
intervallic process is based on the observation
that nearly the same starting pitch is reached
at the end of the pattern. Finally, the pattern
reversal can be considered as a closure based
on diversity, but it is also a typical strategy in
voice leading to absorb a leap by a step in the
opposite direction. Three other patterns can
be created through an octavation of the final
note.
Several
melody
search
systems
use
Narmour’s patterns to describe voice leadings
(Grachten et al., 2005; Grachten & Arcos
2004). Recently, Narmour‘s theory has been
extended with mathematical models of
melodic tension (Margulis 2005; Farbood,
2006). Figure 2 presents several features for
the initial motiv of Franz Schubert’s Sängers
Morgenlied.

It should be a tool for it, guided by human
interaction that corrects and refines the
information retrieval and visualizes its results
for further investigation and interpretation.

Stylistic analysis in computer
science
Many applications in the new research area of
Music Information Retrieval (MIR) rely on
automatic feature extraction techniques either
on audio data or symbolic representations.
The content of audio files or scores can be
characterized by high-dimensional feature
vectors. One fundamental problem in all these
approaches is (i) to determine common
characteristics of specific groups in a given
corpus (classification) or (ii) to evaluate the
similarity between elements and to formalize
these findings in metrics. Based on classifiers,
new elements can be assigned to an
appropriate class (e.g., genre classification,
automatic play list generation). Similarity
metrics can be used to determine clusters of
similar elements. Melody or rhythm search
applications like query by humming (e.g.,
Ghias et al., 1995) and query by beat boxing
(e.g., Kapur et al., 2004) require flexible
similarity measures to find an appropriate
element in musical databases for a small
melodic fragment that highly differs from the
stored original.
The research in music psychology has shown
that the recognition of melodies is based on
their interval structure and their contour

Similarity
measures
for
melodies
are
frequently based on the edit distance
(Levenshtein,
1966),
a
metrics
that
determines the minimal number of operations
that
are
required
to
transform
one

3

CIM07 - Conference on Interdisciplinary Musicology - Proceedings

representation
into
deletion, substitution).

another

(insertion,

into the personality styles of the composers.
Jürgensen
&
Knopke
(2004)
applied
classification techniques to determine the
author attribution and origin in a corpus with
many anonymous compositions.

Fortunately, several powerful toolkits are
available to extract features from audio data
and symbolic representations. Very popular is
the Humdrum toolkit for the **kern format
(Huron, 2002) or jSymbolic for MIDI (McKay
& Fujinaga, 2006). Moreover, the WEKA data
mining toolkit (Witten & Frank 1999) offers
many classification algorithms (e.g., decision
trees) and clustering of groups in the feature
space (e.g., k-means, k-nearest-neighbor,
decision trees and support vector machines).

Despite of the multitude of approaches to
design flexible and robust algorithms to
search for melodies, almost no papers focus
on the detection of motifs. Apparently, the
variety of variations—motific developments—
raises several problems for an automatic
detection. The only approach to detect motifs
was proposed by Lartillot (2007).
All these approaches to determine style
features can benefit from visualizations that
enable experts to interactively search for
interesting phenomena (e.g., correlations
between features, clusters, outliers) in large
datasets. Both Kranenburg & Backer and
Jürgensen & Knopke use scatter plots to
visualize
dependencies
between
style
features. There is still a lack for expressive
visualizations for musical data mining. Selforganizing maps or Kohonen networks
(Kohonen, 1995) are powerful mechanisms to
detect clusters in feature space and to map
high-dimensional feature spaces to two
dimensions (see Toiviainen & Eerola, 2006).
But research in Information Visualization
(e.g., Card et al., 1999, Ware, 2000) or
Visual Analytics has shown the potential of an
interactive exploration of high-dimensional
data. Experts should be able to inspect
different features in separate views, and
select interesting data segments while these
sections are also applied on all views
(brushing). But musical structures also raise
new challenges for visualizations. Sapp
(2005), for instance, presented a new
visualization of modulations within longer
scores.

Computer science in musicology

Figure 2: Melody analysis of Franz Schubert's Sängers
Morgenlied

One interesting direction in interdisciplinary
musicology is the application of machine
learning techniques to the task of composer
or region attribution. The majority of these
algorithms was successfully applied to classify
audio files accord to the genres (e.g.,
Dannenberg et al., 1997; Tzanetakis, 2001).
Several researchers suggest to consider the
scores of an individual composer as a class.
Classification algorithms can then be applied
in order to determine the characteristic
features
that
distinguish
the
classes.
Kranenburg & Backer (2004) used the C4.5
algorithm
to
construct
decision
trees
automatically from training data. Their corpus
contained scores from five composers of the
Baroque and Classical era that were labeled
with the name of the composer. In this corpus
the
feature
vectors
of
the
different
compositions of the composers tend to form
clusters in the feature space. Therefore,
clustering algorithms (e.g., k-means) were
able to detect these clusters automatically.
Moreover, the decision tree provides insights

Despite the fact that many research problems
in musicology require extensive corpus
analyses, the potential of data mining
techniques to support the validation of
musicological hypotheses or to detect the
characteristics of individual scores or groups
of compositions is currently not known in
musicology. McKay’s & Fujinaga’s (2007)
overview article is a good starting point to
overcome this lack.

4

CIM07 - Conference on Interdisciplinary Musicology - Proceedings

the score. Subsequently, export filters
transform this internal representation into the
LilyPond music notation format.2

Data mining and visualization in
musicology
Dataset

Finally, experts can correct errors, resolve
ambiguities or insert new interpretations
(data enhancement). Thus, contextual factors
can be considered. Experts should also be
able to insert annotations directly into the
score. In our vision, a musicological analysis
involves repeatedly iterated applications of
data mining techniques. Moreover, a corpus
may even contain several (conflicting)
interpretations that encode subjective points
of view.

The Telemann Research Center hosts a large
archive of partly unpublished and undated
scores of Georg Philipp Telemann. In a longtime effort, this corpus has been partly
transformed into a symbolic representation
(DARMS format, Dydo, 1997). These scores
were manually created and corrected in a
period of more than 10 years. Due to the
restricted printing capabilities in the NoteProcessor (e.g., figured bass, articulation and
dynamics), the final print-outs are enhanced
with this information.
In order to achieve high-quality results for
publications and in order to ease the editing
process, a conversion to a more flexible
musical notation format was necessary. We
have chosen MusicXML (Good, 2001), as this
format is well documented and all major
music notation programs offer import and
export filters for this format. Our music
analysis program can read scores in
MusicXML,
CapXML
and
MIDI.
As
enharmonically
equivalents
cannot
be
distinguished in the MIDI format, our import
filter determines the underlying scale of the
score. This broad variety of import formats
enables us also to apply our data mining tools
to other corpora or to use other databases of
sheet music (e.g., Mutopia1).

Figure 3: Application of data mining techniques in a
musical corpus

Iterative data mining and visualization

Musical features

Figure 3 illustrates our perspective of
applying
data
mining
techniques
in
musicological corpus analyses. An expert
selects scores and applies automatic feature
extraction techniques in order to evaluate
some hypotheses or to detect interesting
patterns in the corpus. Subsequently, the
result for individual scores or groups of scores
can be inspected.

Many authors distinguish between low-level
features that are derived from physical
properties of audio files, and high-level
features that are associated with properties
derived from a symbolic representation. Our
system only extracts features from symbolic
representations. Therefore, with low-level
features, we refer to properties that are
directly associated to elements of the score.
The detection of these high-level correlations
requires additional inferences and contextual
information.

Therefore, visualizations of the analysis have
to be provided. For the visualization of some
aspects of analysis the results are directly
integrated into the score. The features are
assigned with their corresponding entities in
1
The Mutopia Project: Free Sheet Music for Everyone.
http://www.mutopiaproject.org/

2
LilyPond
...
http://lilypond.org

5

music

notation

for

everyone.

CIM07 - Conference on Interdisciplinary Musicology - Proceedings

Musical features are associated to the
melodic, rhythmic, harmonic and lyrical
properties listed below:

Fujinaga (2006), for example, list 160
features
in
their
MIDI-based
feature
extractor.

Melody. Pitches, intervals, melody contour,
step vs. leap, Narmour pattern (see Figure 1),
ambitus/range of individual parts, pitch and
interval histogram, di- and trigrams over all
features;

In our project, we are especially interested in
high-level features (e.g., characteristics of
voice-leadings and the treatment of harmony
progression). Therefore, we also determine
parallels in quints and octaves between parts,
the distances between voices, and the
treatment of dissonances (anticipations,
neighbor tones, passing tones, suspensions,
escape tones and pedal points). The analysis
of non-chord tones is based on the rhythmic
structure of the score and adds new chord
hypotheses to the harmonic analysis. Finally,
all chord hypotheses are ranked according to
the scale analysis.

Rhythm. Absolute duration of notes and
rests, relative duration in beats (with respect
to the time signature), duration histograms
and di- and trigrams over all features;
Harmony. Chord, chord inversion, base note,
highest note, duplication of pitches in the
chord, chord histogram, chord di- and
trigrams;

The detection of several musical features
(scale, mode, key signature, modulation) is
very often difficult and can benefit from
manual specifications. Therefore, experts can
provide hints. These manual specifications are
considered
within
subsequent
feature
extraction algorithms. This procedure enables
experts to share their expertise and control
all parameters of the data mining process.

Lyrics. Text.
The harmonic analysis is based on a chord
dictionary that is constructed on the basis of
the available scales and the interval
structures
of
chords.
This
algorithm
implements the chord scale theory (see
Nettles & Graf, 2006). In this way, all chord
variants and inversions are constructed. Our
current system comprises
•

67 scales-based tone material with five,
six, seven and eight tones and their modes
and

•

Interactive feature search

the interval structures of triads and sixth,
seventh and extended chords. (major 4th,
ninth, eleventh, thirteenth).

The discussions in our project between
experts in history of music, visualization and
data mining revealed the need to support
interactive queries that may combine aspects
of melody, rhythm, harmony and lyrics. One
example is the search for an individual motif
and its development in the corpus. In the
current prototype, experts can specify
melodic and rhythmic patterns; in response to
these motif queries, the system determines
all variations of motifs (e.g., transposition,
reversal of intervals and direction, note
splitting, augmentation, diminution). With the
following query, e.g., one can search for the
initial motif in Franz Schubert’s “Sängers
Morgenlied” (see also Fig. 2):

Hence, all triads are constructed from an
interval pattern [1 3 5]. An additional
dictionary specifies several descriptors for
chords according to their interval structure.
The chord pattern [1 3b 5b], for example, is
constructed from a harmonic minor scale and
is referred as ‘diminished’ or ‘:dim’ in
LilyPond’s terminology. This systematic way
of chord construction also guarantees that
chord synonyms (e.g., C-major-7 and Aminor-6) are detected automatically. Within
the harmonic analysis of a score, the interval
structure of the chords is compared with both
chord dictionaries in order to determine chord
descriptors.

c4 g8 | e4 c8 f4. g16 a8 f-sharp4 g8
Note that this motif specification also
comprises a prelude. The system determines
all musical segments that are somehow
similar. Therefore, we apply the similarity
measures based on the pitch contour,
Narmour
patterns,
and
motif/thematic
structures.

Even the analysis of low-level properties
results in a high number of features. McKey &

6

CIM07 - Conference on Interdisciplinary Musicology - Proceedings

interesting and worth to be analyzed (Hörnel
& Menzel, 1999).

Implications
Today, music analysis is still an extensive
manual work. A highly adaptive computeraided music analysis offers possibilities to
support the teaching and learning of
compositional techniques; to evaluate the
novelty or accordance of musical pieces with
respect to a manually selected corpus. Our
data mining techniques are not restricted to
Western or tonal music. Hence, contrastive
analyses within large corpora may enable us
to
study
more
complex
musicological
problems or can make expensive manual
analyses more efficient.

These features will be stored as meta-data
and can be used for graphical output and as
input by several further systems, for instance,
to enable a listening analysis, a performance
system can use this meta-information, add
several means of expression according to
them (dynamic, articulation, tempo, etc.),
and realize an expressive performance.

Conclusion
We developed a flexible music retrieval
system that experts in music history can use
to search for melodic, rhythmic, harmonic and
lyrical features that may confirm the objective
of analysis. Color codes and textual
annotations are used to integrate the search
results directly into automatically generated
scores.

The interactive analysis of musical artifacts
from a musicological perspective raises new
challenges for an adaptable and iterative
analysis of large corpora within a contrastive
analysis. In this scenario, data mining,
machine learning and visualization techniques
enable researchers to evaluate hypotheses
from a broad range of perspectives (e.g.,
music
history,
music
theory,
ethnomusicology, etc.).

Telemann's œuvre reflects the musical
development from baroque to the classical
period of European music. Thus, Telemann
used certain musical features solely in specific
periods of time. Therefore, our approach
offers completely new perspectives for the
dating of scores and a critical judgment of
anonymous or controversial scores. Moreover,
the musical treatment of the underlying lyrics
(libretto) in vocal works has not been studied
within the field of 'artificial intelligence and
music', but raises interesting musicological
questions.

Future Work
Further research and development will focus
on two directions:
Automatic analysis
The extension of our catalog of compositional
means for structuring and expression can
allow more complex analysis queries. Our aim
is to widen the stylistic range of analyses to
enable the application on very different and
inhomogeneous corpora. This could open up
the way for contrastive analyses of composers
and style epochs and raises the question of
how to measure stylistic difference or
similarity.

References
Card, S., Mackinlay, J., and Shneiderman, B.,
editors (1999). Readings in Information
Visualization: Using Vision to Think.
Morgan Kaufmann.
Chai, W. and Vercoe, B. (2002) Melody Retrieval
on the Web. In SPIE Multimedia Computing
and Networking, pp. 226–241.

Interface and output
Style descriptive formalisms are needed;
these have to represent more than just
contrapuntal rules or statistically significant
frequency.
Lots
of
automatic
music
composition systems have shown the
tendency to generalization conflicts with the
intention to statistically less significant
features that make a piece of music

Dannenberg, R., Thom, B., and Watson, D. (1997).
A Machine Learning Approach to Musical
Style Recognition. In Int. Computer Music
Conf.
Dowling, W. (1978) Scale and Contour: Two
Components of a Theory of Memory for
Melodies.
Psychological
Review,
85(4):341–354.

7

CIM07 - Conference on Interdisciplinary Musicology - Proceedings

Dürr,

A. (1952) Zur Echtheit einiger Bach
zugeschriebener
Kantaten.
In
BachJahrbuch 1951/52, pp. 30–46.

Kapur, A., Benning, M., and Tzanetakis, G. (2004)
Query-by-Beat-Boxing: Music Information
Retrieval for the DJ. In Int. Conf. on Music
Information Retrieval (ISMIR).

Dydo, S.J. (1997) DARMS: The Note-Processor
Dialect. In Selfridge-Field, E. (ed.) Beyond
MIDI—The Handbook of Musical Codes.
MIT Press, Cambridge.

Kranenburg, P. v. and Baker, E. (2004) Musical
Style Recognition — A Quantitative
Approach. In Conf. on Interdisciplinary
Musicology (CIM).

Farbood, M. (2006) A Quantitative, Parametric
Model of Musical Tension. PhD thesis, MIT
Media Laboratory.

Kohonen, T. (1995). Self-Organizing
Springer Verlag, Berlin.

Fleischhauer, G. (1963) Einige Gedanken zur
Harmonik Georg Philipp Telemanns. In
Beiträge zu einem neuen Telemann-Bild,
Konferenzbericht der 1. Magdeburger
Telemann-Festtage, pp. 50–63.

Maps.

Lange, C. (2004) "Der Abgrund muß erzittern" —
Naturgewalten in der Musik Telemanns. In
"Telemann — der musikalische Maler".
Konferenz anlässlich der 17. Magdeburger
Telemann-Festtage 2004. (in print).

Ghias, A., Logan, J., Chamberlin, D., and Smith, B.
(1995) Query by Humming —Musical
Information
Retrieval
in
an
Audio
Database. In ACM Multimedia, pp. 231–
236.

Lartillot, O. (2007) Motivic Pattern Mining in
Symbolic
Music:
Managing
Multidimensionality and Transformations in
Music. In 31st Ann. Conf. of the German
Classiﬁcation Society.

Grachten, M. and Arcos, J. (2004) Using the
Implication/Realization
Model
for
Measuring Melodic Similarity. In 16th
European Conf. on Artiﬁcial Intelligence
(ECAI).

Levenshtein, V.I. (1966) Binary Codes Capable of
Correcting Deletions,
Insertions, and
Reversals.
Soviet
Physics
Doklady,
10(8):707–710.
Margulis, E. (2005) A Model for Melodic
Expectation. Music Perception, 22(4): 663–
714.

Grachten, M., Arcos, J., and Lopez de Mantaras, R.
(2005)
Melody
Retrieval
using
the
Implication/Realization Models. In 6th Int.
Conf. on Music Information Retrieval
(ISMIR).

McKay, C. and Fujinaga, I. (2006) jSymbolic: A
Feature Extractor for MIDI Files. In Int.
Computer Music Conf., pp. 302–305.

Good, M. (2001) MusicXML for Notation and
Analysis. In Hewlett, W.B. and SelfridgeField, E. (eds.) The Virtual Score:
Representation, Retrieval, Restoration. MIT
Press, Cambridge, pp. 113-124.

McKay,

Hirschmann, W. (1992) Die gewisse Schreibart.
Gedanken zum Problem des Personalstils
bei Georg Philipp Telemann. Concerto,
9:17–37.

C. and Fujinaga, I. (2007) StyleIndependent
Computer-Assisted
Exploratory Analysis of Large Music
Collections. Journal of Interdisciplinary
Music Studies, 1(1): 63–85.

McNab, R., Smith, L., Witten, I., Henderson, C.,
and Cunningham, S. (1996) Toward the
Digital Music Library: Tune Retrieval from
Acoustic Input. In ACM Digital Libraries,
pp. 11–18.

Hobohm, W. (1983) Vom lombardischen Rhythmus
bei Telemann. In Die Bedeutung Georg
Philipp Telemanns für die Entwicklung der
europäischen
Musikkultur
im
18.
Jahrhundert, S. 4-22.

Meyer, B. (1956) Emotion and Meaning in Music.
Chicago University Press. Chicago.
Narmour, E. (1990) The Analysis and Cognition of
Basic Melodic Structures. University of
Chicago Press, Chicago.

Hörnel, D. and Menzel, W. (1999) Learning Musical
Structure and Style with Neural Networks.
Computer Music Journal, 22(4):44–62.

Narmour, E. (1992) The Analysis and Cognition of
Melodic Complexity. University of Chicago
Press, Chicago.

Huron, D. (2002) Music Information Processing
using the Humdrum Toolkit: Concepts,
Examples, and Lessons. Computer Music
Journal, 26:15–30.

Nettles, B. and Graf, R. (2006) Chord Scale Theory
and Jazz Harmony. Advance Music,
Rottenburg.

Jürgensen, F. and Knopke, I. (2004) A Comparison
of Automated Methods for the Analysis of
Style
in
Fifteenth-Century
Song
Intabulations. In Conf. on Interdisciplinary
Musicology (CIM).

Reipsch, B. (1998a) Zum "Jahrgangsdenken"
Georg Philipp Telemanns — dargelegt an
Beispielen geistlicher Kantaten Eisenacher
Dichter. In "Nun bringt ein polnisch Lied

8

CIM07 - Conference on Interdisciplinary Musicology - Proceedings

die gantze Welt zum Springen". Telemann
und Andere in der Musiklandschaft
Sachsens und Polens, (Arolser Beiträge zur
Musikforschung, Band 6), pp. 63–76.
Reipsch, R.-J. (1998b) Telemanns Rezitativtechnik
— Untersuchungen am vokalen Spätwerk.
In Bericht über den 11. Internationalen
Kongreß
der
Gesellschaft
für
Musikforschung "Musik als Text" (Bd. 2:
Freie Referate), pp. 283–294.
Sapp, C. (2005) Visual Hierarchical Key Analysis.
Computers in Edutainment, 4(4).
Telemann, G.P. (1767) Letzte Beschäftigung Georg
Philipp Telemanns, im 86sten Lebensjahre,
bestehend in einer musikalischen Klangund Intervallen-Tafel. Hamburg. (reprint
in: Rackwitz, W. (ed.) Georg Philipp
Telemann. Singen ist das Fundament zur
Music
in
allen
Dingen.
Eine
Dokumentensammlung,
S.
266-273,
1981).
Toiviainen, P. and Eerola, T. (2006) Visualization in
Comparative
Music
Research.
In
Computational Statistics (COMPSTAT), pp.
209–221.
Tzanetakis, G. (2001) Automatic Musical Genre
Classiﬁcation of Audio Signals. In Int. Conf.
on Music Information Retrieval (ISMIR).
Ware,

C. (2000). Information Visualization:
Perception for Design. Morgan Kaufmann.

Wertheimer, M. (1923) Untersuchungen zur Lehre
von
der
Gestalt
II.
Psychologische
Forschung, 4: 301–350. (also in Ellis, W.
(1938) A Source Book of Gestalt
Psychology. London: Routledge & Kegan
Paul, pp. 71-88).
Witten, I. H. and Frank, E. (1999) Data Mining:
Practical Machine Learning Tools and
Techniques with Java Implementations.
Morgan Kaufmann.

9

