Yale University Department of Music

Music Theory and Music History
Author(s): Glen Haydon
Source: Journal of Music Theory, Vol. 7, No. 2 (Winter, 1963), pp. 249-255
Published by: Duke University Press on behalf of the Yale University Department of Music
Stable URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/843110
Accessed: 14/12/2009 21:17
Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of JSTOR's Terms and Conditions of Use, available at
http://www.jstor.org/page/info/about/policies/terms.jsp. JSTOR's Terms and Conditions of Use provides, in part, that unless
you have obtained prior permission, you may not download an entire issue of a journal or multiple copies of articles, and you
may use content in the JSTOR archive only for your personal, non-commercial use.
Please contact the publisher regarding any further use of this work. Publisher contact information may be obtained at
http://www.jstor.org/action/showPublisher?publisherCode=duke.
Each copy of any part of a JSTOR transmission must contain the same copyright notice that appears on the screen or printed
page of such transmission.
JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide range of
content in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and facilitate new forms
of scholarship. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.

Duke University Press and Yale University Department of Music are collaborating with JSTOR to digitize,
preserve and extend access to Journal of Music Theory.

http://www.jstor.org

249
Music

Theory
Music

and

History

GLEN HAYDON
In any consideration
of advanced graduate studies in music,
it
is most appropriate
that the question of how music theory relates to music history
should arise.
The following
discussion
an attempt to summarize
represents
what seem to be
briefly
the most pertinent
issues.
I should like to comment
First,
on
the general nature and objectives
of graduate
studies in music.
Then I shall describe
and illustrate
how I would
specifically
the role of music
interpret
theory in relation to music history
in advanced graduate studies in music.
One of the commonly
music is to investigate

stated objectives
of graduate
musical
styles in the various

study in
periods

at the Symposium
[Presented
on Music Theory sponsored
by the Graduate School and the School of Music,
The Ohio
State University,
Columbus,
Ohio, October 5-6, 1962]

250
of music history (Medieval, Renaissance, Baroque, etc.). Another is to study particular style-species
(Mass, madrigal,
And a
opera, sonata, etc.) in their historical development.
third is to pinpoint the styles of individual composers.
To
approach to these style problems I
clarify the musicological
have found it helpful to compare the layman's approach to muFor example, it happens that our local radio station
sic itself.
has a program of standard art music at our lunch hour from
one to two o'clock daily. My wife and I often tune in this program at the lunch table, but too late to get the opening announcement.
My wife is not a musician but has heard a great deal of music.
I have found her to be very proficient in identifying musical
styles by the simple process of saying, "that sounds like Wagner:' or "that sounds like early Renaissance music;' or "that
or "that sounds like Beethoven's late
sounds like Palestrina'
music"' etc. In other words, over the years, she has gained a
wide knowledge of musical styles; and, I am sure her experience is typical of many musical laymen.
But the professional must go further than the layman. One of
the objects of the musicological
approach is to go beyond the
simple recognition and identification of various musical styles
to a knowledge and understanding of their musical-technical
distinctions.
Such an insight into the nature of music implies
a technical study of such musical elements as melody types,
dissonance treatment, cadence structures,
rhythmic devices,
and structural patterns.
In other words, we come back to one
of the main objectives of advanced graduate studies in music:
to explain in musical-technical
terms the stylistic factors that
distinguish the music of different periods and different comWork of this type has been subsumed under the rubric
posers.
of style-criticism.
A necessary
for successful
prerequisite
achievements in this area of graduate work in music is, obviously, a solid background in the field of music theory.
The usual undergraduate courses in music theory should, aBut something
mong other things, satisfy this prerequisite.
more is needed. To clarify what I mean by this need, I have
resorted to the phrase, 'the theory of music theory" Such an
expression
helps insofar as it shows that so-called courses in
theory in the undergraduate curriculum are rather more practical than theoretical.
That is, they are designed primarily to
give the student skill in manipulating the materials of music,
with emphasis in the direction of musical composition.
The
theoretical knowledge presented in these courses is handed out

251
on a platter,
The students are told merely
so to speak.
how
are named and classified,
music is notated, how intervals
how
scales are constructed,
how cadences
are built, how melodies
and harmonized,
are composed
but rarely
Such incomwhy.
are understandable,
since a course infreshplete explanations
not the place to go into an extensive
man harmony is obviously
and historical
study of the theory of harmony in its systematic
Such studies
school,
aspects.
belong rather in the graduate
The difference
in the two approaches
and beyond.
to the theory
of music may be clearly
seen if we compare
any conventional
textbook of music theory with such works as Joseph Yasser's
A Theory of Evolving
Matthew
(New York,
1932),
Tonality
Shirlaw's
The Theory of Harmony
or Hugo
1917),
(London,
Riemann's
Geschichte
der Musiktheorie
of Music The(History
with commentary
Lincoln
ory, translated
by Raymond Haggh.
The textbook's
concern
is peda1962).
Nebraska,
primary
of the
and presentation
gogical,
dealing with the organization
for purposes
material
of instruction;
the true theory
whereas
book's primary concern
may be characterized
roughly as the
advancement
of musical
knowledge.
Pertinent
to the foregoing
discussion
and the ways that music
I should
theory relate to music
studies,
history in advanced
like to mention Knud Jeppesen's
work in Renaisdistinguished
sance music.
His book, The Style of Palestrina
and the Dissonance (2d rev. and enl. ed., Copenhagen,
1946), was actusubmitted
to GuidoAdler
ally based on his doctoral dissertation
at the University
of Vienna in 1922.
the book lies
Although
in the field of music theory,
it is permeated
with
ostensibly
historical
and references
implications
ranging from Gregorian
chant to Bach and even Mozart.
this type of detailed,
Obviously
of late 16th-century
thorough analysis and description
polyphony
as represented
in the vocal works of Palestrina
is imperative
for a thorough understanding
of the intrinsic
musical
factors
involved in the shifting
of music
Without
processes
history.
this kind of penetrating
the study of music history
investigation
would tend to remain merely
a study of the more superficial
of each period.
aspects
But Jeppesen's
and historical
research
into the
systematic
Palestrina
besides
style has had another important significance
its contribution
to our understanding
of a great period in the
He has made a vital contribution
to our unhistory of music.
of the principles
of contrapuntal
derstanding
technique in music.
To be sure, the vast amount of detailed
information
contained
in Jeppesen's
book on the Palestrina
style was not well adapted
to the teaching of counterpoint.
But his later book, Counter-

252
point: The Polyphonic Vocal Style of the Sixteenth Century
(English trans. by Glen Haydon. New York, 1939), based on
those earlier researches,
was expressly designed as a textbook for courses in modal counterpoint. As such it has contributed notably to the great revolution in the teaching of counterpoint, wherein "strict counterpoint;' has given way to authentic modal counterpoint based on the style of Palestrina, on
the one hand, and to tonal counterpoint based on the style of
Bach, on the other. This comment is not meant to imply that
the styles of Palestrina and Bach represent the only possible
bases for contrapuntal studies; but they do provide convenient
and practical points of departure, which, in the course of further studies, would naturally be extended to other periods and
styles.
When we say that a knowledge of the theory of music is basic
to studies in the history of music, we should not overlook the
fact that the converse statement is, perhaps, equally true. A
knowledge of the history of music is basic to studies in the
Not only do we need to study the history of
theory of music.
theory of music theory (particularly as represented in the writings of theorists throughout the ages), but also the statements
and interpretations of the theorists need to be examined and
evaluated in the light of the musical practices of each succeeding era.
Music theory is needed not only for the perception of different
styles - it is basic for the understanding of the whole subject
matter of music history.
In other words, the student needs
his music theory not only to understand what distinguishes Bach
counterpoint from Palestrina counterpoint, but also merely to
understand what makes a fugue and what makes a motet.
I
think we would all recognize the fact that too many of our graduate students are distressingly
weak in the skills of simple,
basic, reliable harmonic, not to mention contrapuntal, analysis.
In our program of graduate courses at the University of North
main categories of style studies: style
Carolina, wehavethree
periods, style species, and the styles of individual composers.
The style period courses include a series of survey courses
covering the history of music from ancient to modern times.
The style species courses deal with the various genres; such
as: the Mass, the motet, the opera, the oratorio, the sonata
form, keyboard music, the string quartet, and the art song.
Composer courses may survey the works of single composers:
Bach, Beethoven, or Brahms; or small groups of composers,
such as Ravel and Debussy, or the French "Six'' Or, they may

253
concentrate on individual genres in the works of a given comthe cantatas of Bach, or the string
poser; as for example:
quartets of Beethoven. In all these courses, since the descriptive analysis of each musical style provides the focal point for
the studies, music theory plays an important role. In addition
we have a series of miscellaneous
courses; such as: Introduction to Musicology, Musical Bibliography, Notation, The HisFolk Music,
Practices,
tory of Music Theory, Performance
and American Music. In all these courses a knowledge of music theory is practically indespensable.
I say practicallyindespensable because presumably a student without a solid background in music theory could get much that is new to him from
these courses; but, there is no doubt that he would also miss
much of their potential deeper significance.
In addition to the types of courses mentioned, we have a set of
graduate courses in music theory in the narrower sense of the
for candidates for the Master of
term, designed especially
Music degree in composition.
These courses include advanced
work in harmony, modal and tonal counterpoint,
canon and
and composition.
These are not courses
fugue, orchestration,
in musicology in the most significant senses of the term, but
we should all be happy if all our graduate students could get
that much training in music theory, so-called, or composition.
In fact, some of our best Ph. D. candidates have completed the
Master of Music in composition before continuing for the doctorate in musicology,
and most of our advanced students do
take one or more of these courses.
From the discussion so far it must be apparent that I see little
need for dividing graduate work in music under
justificationor
the separate categories of music theory and musicology.
Such
a distinction apparently tends to identify musicology with the
history of music.
Musicology, to me, is a more comprehensive term that includes both music theory, (particularly as applied to the descriptive analysis of musical styles) and music
There is, of course, some basis for a distinction if,
history.
by music theory, we mean practical courses in musical composition rather than work in the area that I have referred to as
the theory of music theory.
The one type of course would lead
to actual musical compositions;
whereas the other would lead
to the formulation of theoretical
principles such as are found
in The Style of Palestrina and the Dissonance, by Jeppesen, or
inmy own The Evolution of the Six-four Chord (Berkeley, California, 1933), or in one type of article constantly appearing
in The Journal of Music Theory.

254
In 1940 at Cleveland, Curt Sachs read a paper before a joint
session of the Music Teachers National Association
and the
American Musicological
Society in which he made the categorical statement, 'The theory of music is not in the domain
of musicologists"
He goes on to say:
Music is the sole consideration in theory, whether melody
or form, harmony, counterpoint or orchestration are concerned, and beyond being a musician, the only prerequisite
imposed on the author of theoretical works is the background and ability to be interested in the problem, to organize his thoughts and to expound them in a well-organized book. Therefore the leading books on theory were
written by composers when their own creative imagination
clashed with the rules of yesterday: Jean- Philippe Rameau
wrote the first treatise on harmony in 1722: Johann Joseph
Fux, the first and long-lived treatise on counterpoint in
1725: Hector Berlioz, the first and still vital book on orchestration in 1839; and the latest theoretical books came
from Arnold Schoenberg and Paul Hindemith (MTNA, Proceedings for 1940, 35th series, p. 60).
I have often wondered just what Sachs meant by this passage.
The only rationalization I have been able to make concerning it
is that he must have been thinking of the theory of music as
practical or applied music theory, or what might be called
textbook music theory designed for the training of composers.
Whatever we may think of Sach's pronouncement from this point
of view, of one thing we can be reasonably sure: he did not
refer to what I have called the theory of music theory. One
has only to page through his most recent posthumus book, The
Wellsprings of Music (Ed. by Japp Kunst. The Hague, 1962),
to realize that he was himself an outstanding music theorist particularly in the areas of melody, rhythm, and polyphony.
In my own Introduction to Musicology (Chapel Hill, N. C., 1941)
I adopted the epistemological
concepts of space and time and
divided the subject matter under the two main headings: systematic and historical.
Music theory is, in a sense, the principal section of the systematic orientation.
"Dealing directly
with the work of art and leaning heavily on all the auxiliary
sciences it attempts the descriptive analysis, if not the explanation, of the musical composition in technical terms" (p. 10).
The historical approach, in terms of temporal sequence, supplements the systematic approaches and together they constitute the two axes in the frame of reference in relation to which
musical knowledge and insight may become explicit.
Although

255
the emphasis may vary from time to time or from one research
the two approaches
to another,
are inextrinormally
project
of such introcably entwined so that it is only for the purposes
here that they may need to be
spection as we are undergoing
distinguished.
If one has any doubt as to the concern of contemporary
musicolof musical
one need only glance at
ogy for problems
theory,
of the
the list of topics in the Report of the Eighth Congress
1961 (Kassel,
International
New York,
Musicological
Society,
In practically
there is to
1961).
every paper and discussion
be seen a blending of the theoretical
and historical
orientation
in the treatment
of the immediate
A striking
examproblem.
of Tonality in
ple is the round table devoted to the "Awareness
the 16th Century:'
In closing,
there is perhaps little that I need to add concerning
the general
of advanced graduate
nature and purposes
studies
in music.
the same as those in other disThey are basically
of subject
matter
and skill in the
ciplines;
namely,
mastery
of research
as evidenced
in a dessertation
(the retechniques
sult of independent
which adds to the sum of human
research)
or presents
results
that have enduring value.
But,
knowledge
as one graduate catalogue
the accumuaptly puts it, "Neither
lation of facts, however great in amount, nor the completion
of
advanced
however
can be substituted
for
courses,
numerous,
this power of independent
and proof of its possesinvestigation
sion" (The Graduate School,
The University
of North Carolina
No. 642, (Chapel Hill, N.C.,
Record,
1962)p.53).

