Yale University Department of Music

The Roots of Form in Schoenberg's "Sketches"
Author(s): Martha MacLean Hyde and Schoenberg
Source: Journal of Music Theory, Vol. 24, No. 1 (Spring, 1980), pp. 1-36
Published by: Duke University Press on behalf of the Yale University Department of Music
Stable URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/843737
Accessed: 15/12/2009 16:00
Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of JSTOR's Terms and Conditions of Use, available at
http://www.jstor.org/page/info/about/policies/terms.jsp. JSTOR's Terms and Conditions of Use provides, in part, that unless
you have obtained prior permission, you may not download an entire issue of a journal or multiple copies of articles, and you
may use content in the JSTOR archive only for your personal, non-commercial use.
Please contact the publisher regarding any further use of this work. Publisher contact information may be obtained at
http://www.jstor.org/action/showPublisher?publisherCode=duke.
Each copy of any part of a JSTOR transmission must contain the same copyright notice that appears on the screen or printed
page of such transmission.
JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide range of
content in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and facilitate new forms
of scholarship. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.

Duke University Press and Yale University Department of Music are collaborating with JSTOR to digitize,
preserve and extend access to Journal of Music Theory.

http://www.jstor.org

THE ROOTS OF FORM IN

SCHOENBERG'S SKETCHES

Martha MacLean Hyde

Descriptive titles seem preferableon the whole, but I was tempted
to call this paper "SchoenbergIs Alive" because my principalaim will
be to reversethe conclusions advancedby PierreBoulez under the title
"Schoenberg Is Dead." Boulez published his prematureobituary for
Schoenberg'sinfluence in 1952, but its argumentsstill merit consideration for two reasons. First, it remains the most forceful and concise
expression of difficulties that Boulez found in Schoenberg'smethodone he has never retracted,but rather reiteratedand extended in later
works. Second and more important, Boulez's criticisms, though
severely challengingSchoenberg'sachievement,have been neglected by
all but a very few scholars.2 Schoenberg'sinfluence will obviously not
live or die on scholarlycommand,but Boulez's criticism,and I hope my
reply, are valuable because they help us better to understand the
method and the achievementof his music.
resourcesof Schoenberg's
Of the two major apparentdifficulties in Schoenberg'stwelve-tone
method, what might be called "the harmonicproblem"and "the form
problem," Boulez concentrates on the latter-the potential of the
method to sustain extended forms comparable to those of tonal
compositions. Against the common view that Schoenbergwent too far
in trusting to a method that lacks structuralprinciplescomparableto
1

those of tonal harmony,3 Boulez, the second-generation
avant-gardist,
asserts that Schoenberg did not go far enough. In Boulez's view,
Schoenbergfailed to explore the potential of the twelve-tonemethod to
generateits own forms.
This explains a certain weaknessin most of [Schoenberg's] twelveand classicalforms ruling most of his
tone works. The pre-classical
compositions were in no way historicallyconnected with the twelvetone discovery;the result is that a contradictionarises between the
forms dictated by tonality and a language[the twelve-tonemethod]
of which the laws of organizationare still only dimly perceived.It is
not only that this languagefinds no sanction in the forms used by
Schoenberg,but something more negative:namely, that these forms
rule out every possibility of organization implicit in the new
material.4
Boulez complains further of Schoenberg'suse of "clich6s typical of a
romanticism at once ostentatious and outmoded," in particular
accompanied melody, counterpoint based on principaland subsidiary
voices (Hauptstimme and Nebenstimme), rhythmic structurebased on
broken chords, and repetistrong and weak beats, false appoggiaturas,
tions. These complaints lead to the conclusion that Schoenberg's
twelve-tone music did not escape the basic principles of the tonal
language,as Schoenbergalwaysclaimed,becauseit maintainedmelody,
harmony,and counterpointas separatefunctions.5
Whether,in the common view, from going too far or, in Boulez's
view, from not going far enough, it is clear that Schoenberg'smethod
is at least gravelyill by his own standards
unless one can show that the
forms and phrases he employs, though they may seem pre-classical
or
classical, are not tonal cliches, and do not rule out the possibilitiesof
implicitin twelve-tonecomposition, but ratherfulfill them.
organization
That is what this paper attempts to do with the help of Schoenberg's
manuscriptsketches. In this initial study, I will have to concentrateon
Schoenberg'stechniques for structuring phrases, the smallest formal
units of his compositions, and his techniques for motivic variationand
development. Far from incorporatingtonal clich6s, these techniques
provide the means by which Schoenbergwas able to build up extended
forms usingtwelve-toneproceduresalone.
It may be helpful first, however,to see what claims Schoenberghimself made for the formal resources of the twelve-tone method. They
hardly bear out Boulez's contention that even "though Schoenberg's
work is essentially experimental, it lacks ambition."6 Statements in
Schoenberg'spublicationsthroughoutthe 1920's and 30's show that he
wasambitiouspreciselywhere Boulez would find him timid-in developing the twelve-tonemethod's potential for extended forms:
2

It is evident that abandoningtonality can be contemplated only if
other satisfactory means for coherence and articulation present
themselves.
From the very beginning,this was clear in my mind: tonality's aids
to articulation having dropped out, one must find some substitute,
so that longer forms can once more be constructed.7
Implicit in these sentences is Schoenberg'sconfidence that his method
did provide its own means for coherence and articulation-satisfactory
substitutes for tonal techniques-but other statements make this claim
explicit. In "Composition With Twelve Tones," his manifesto first
presentedin 1934 and publishedin 1950, he proclaimssuccess:
After many unsuccessfulattempts duringa period of approximately
twelve years, I laid the foundations for a new procedurein musical
constructionwhichseemed fitted to replacethose structuraldifferentiations providedformerlyby tonal harmonies.8
Toward the end of his life, the claim became even stronger,the success
less ambiguous:
Forty yearshave since provedthat the psychologicalbasis of all these
changes was correct. Music without a constant reference to a tonic
was comprehensible....9

In most of these statements,Schoenbergwas respondingto scepticism
about his method that would receive something like definitive form in
Boulez's article. But his declarationsrarely satisfied his critics, either
then or now. When pressed further by those he sometimes called his
"inquisitivetormentors,"he tended to become mystical, or to resortto
vague analogies with tonal music, or to impugn the imagination and
intelligenceof his critics:
Who can say today how a principalsubject must be built up. What
one must do that it may hold together?... Who can say how a fluid
form is solidified, how an introduction or a development must be
evolved? He who can do these things and knows will not be in doubt
as to whetheror not tonality must be restoredto achieve form.10
Schoenbergmaintainedthis Buddha-likereticenceabout his techniques
for buildingup extended forms, but the claim that those who say don't
know and those who know don't say hardly silenced the talkers. The
manuscriptsketches show clearly that Schoenbergpreferredto suffer
his inquisitive tormentors in enigmatic silence rather than join in the
chatter by divulgingthe techniques he had worked out for achieving
form. Whenhe did respond, he was evasive, if not quite misleading,as
the sketches show. They are therefore crucially important in under3

standingSchoenberg'ssystem, for they make clearwhat he kept hidden
-how an extended form can be derivedfrom a single twelve-tonerow.
I need to begin by reviewingsome principlesof twelve-toneharmonic
structurewhich I have discussedelsewhere,becauseharmonicstructure
is the foundation upon which Schoenbergbuilds extended form.'1 It
will be convenient and appropriateto use examplesfrom Schoenberg's
lecture "Composition With Twelve Tones," for it representshis only
sketches, illustrate
manifesto, and its examples, with the corresponding
the fundamentalprinciplesof twelve-toneharmony.
Part way through an early version of "Composition With Twelve
Tones," Schoenberg advances an ambiguousredefinition of what constitutes a harmonyunderhis new method:
I... arrived at the concept whereby the vertical and horizontal,
harmonicand melodic, the simultaneousand the successivewere all
in reality comprisedwithin one unified space. It followed from this
that whateveroccurs at one point in the space, occurs not only there
but in every dimensionalaspect of the spatialcontinuum,so that any
particularmelodic motion ... will not only have its effect upon the
harmony, but on everything subsequent that is comprised within
that spatialcontinuum.12
Schoenberg,then, does not conceive of a harmony as merely a vertical
event with pitches sounding simultaneously, but asserts that melodic
events also have harmonic implications. He proposes that a legitimate
harmony comprisesall pitches, either simultaneousor successive,which
are temporarilyassociated or, as he describesit, "comprisedwithin the
same spatialcontinuum."
One of the examplescited in "CompositionWithTwelve Tones" will
clarify Schoenberg's rather obscure concept of "multi-dimensional
musical space" and show precisely its importancefor harmonic structure, and also for form. This example (Example 1) contains the opening
phrase of the Minuet from the Piano Suite, Op. 25. Schoenberg
points out that the basic set, which is partitionedinto three tetrachords,
is presentedin an irregularfashion: "The melody begins with the fifth
tone, while the accompaniment, much later, begins with the first
tone."13 (In this and the following examples,the pitches are labelledby
order numbers 1 through 12.) Schoenberggives two reasons to justify
this irregular presentation: first, the Minuet represents the fifth
movement of the Suite so that the basic set has become sufficiently
familiar,and second, each tetrachordmaintainsthe correct orderingof
its pitches and consequently each tetrachordcan function as an independent small set. But Schoenberg stops short of explaining what
criteriacontrol how these tetrachordsare used independently.Analysis
of the harmonic structureof this example revealssome of his criteria,
4

A

A

A
A
BasicSet: E F G Dflat G-flat E-flat /A-flat D B C A B-flat'

Example 1. Suite, Op. 25, Minuet
Copyright 1925 by Universal Edition, A.G. Vienna.
Used by permission.

5

for it exposes two connected dimensions. The first, which can be
termed the "primarydimension,"includes the entire phraseand simply
reproducesthe twelve successive pitches of the basic set. That is, the
"primary harmonic dimension" contains contiguous elements of the
basic set and occurs with each of its orderedstatements. The second,
the "secondary dimension," spans each individualmeasureand represents two hexachordal harmonies (marked A) which contain pitches
that are non-adjacentin the basic set, but which are equivalent to its
principal hexachord. "Equivalent" here means that they are not
identical, but rather are unordered and related by transposition or
inversion or both. In other words, measure 1 unfolds a hexachordcontaining pitches with the non-successiveordernumbers1, 2, 5, 6, 7, and
8, but this harmony is equivalentto (in fact, is an inverted transposition of) the pitches with the successiveordernumbers1, 2, 3, 4, 5, and
6. Similarly,the second measureunfolds a hexachordcontainingpitches
in
non-adjacent the row, but againequivalentto the principalhexachord
of the basic set. Notice that while the hexachordsin both measuresare
equivalent to the principalhexachord of the basic set, the orderingof
their respective pitches differs from those in the basic set. Thus, even
though this secondaryharmonic dimension contains hexachordswhich
are inversionsor transpositions(or both) of the principalhexachordof
the basic set, they are not presented by the same succession of
14
intervals.
This simple example shows how Schoenbergcould legitimatelyassert
that a single twelve-tone row can integrate all harmonicand melodic
dimensionsof a composition, andalso shows the rudimentary
techniques
implied by that assertion. Scholarsand composershave misunderstood,
however, and would assertthat becausepitches adjacentin the example
are not adjacentin the row, Schoenberghas had to impose an arbitrary
harmonicstructureon his theme in orderto generatea complete musical
texture, since the row itself was insufficient to generateone. 1 Boulez
does not mention this example in "SchoenbergIs Dead,"but it is easy
to infer his position from other argumentsand examples.16 No doubt
he would complain that Schoenberg'sattempt to combine the twelvetone method with the tonal form of the minuet involvedhim in arbitrary
and contradictory restrictions. The accented downbeats and two-bar
phrases requiredin a minuet, Boulez would argue, block a rhythmic
and harmonic structure uniquely serial. But, as this example shows,
two
Schoenberg's simultaneousdimensionsof harmonicstructureclearly
delineate a two-bar phrase subdivided into two measures of equal
length. The minuet form is thus not a tonal convention arbitrarily
imposed, but ratheris re-created
throughtwelve-tonetechniquesalone.
Example 1 is worth a moment more, because it conveniently
demonstrates three principles of Schoenberg'smethod for organizing
6

harmonicstructure. First, twelve-tone harmoniesneed not be simultaneous, that is, they need not occur only in the vertical dimension. In
Schoenberg'sidea of "two-or-more-dimensional
space" no categorical
distinctionexists between the verticaland the horizontal.Consequently,
he no longer defines harmoniesas vertical simultaneities,but ratheras
pitches occupying the same "spatialcontinuum." This concept allows
Schoenberg in Example 1 to regard the hexachord unfolded in each
measure as an harmonic entity, even though its elements unfold
successively.
Second, a single harmonic event necessarily affects more than one
dimension. In Example 1, for instance, each pitch functions simultaneously in two different harmonic dimensions. This principle is
confirmedby statementsin "CompositionWithTwelveTones."
Any particularmelodic motion-for instance, a chromaticstep-will
not only have its effect upon the harmony, but on everything
subsequent that is comprisedwithin that spatialcontinuum .... This
circumstance. . . enables the composer to assign one part of his
thinkingto ... the vertical,and anotherin the horizontal.17
Because, in Schoenberg's view, musical ideas necessarily affect both
vertical and horizontal dimensions, a composer must structure both
he
simultaneously; cannot merely attend to the unfoldingof the row.
Third, and most important, the order of the twelve pitch-classes
defines the harmoniesof the basic set, but it defines them primarilyby
intervallic content rather than by pitch-classcontent. In Example 1,
for instance, the harmonies marked A in the composition contain
entirelydifferentpitches from those markedA in the basic set, but have
identical total intervalliccontent. Moreover,these harmoniesneed not
be presented by the same succession of intervals,that is, the internal
ordering of their pitches need not be the same. Notice that the
harmoniesmarkedA are, in fact, stated by entirely different intervallic
patterns; consequently the ordering of their respective pitches is not
identical. But because they all are related by transpositionor inversion
or both, their total intervalliccontent is the same.
This view of how the basic set generates harmonic structuresin
several dimensions is confirmed repeatedly by Schoenberg'scompositional sketches. One of them, a sketch for the String QuartetNo. 4,
Op. 37, given in Example 2, shows him working out a harmonicstructure similarto that of Example 1.18 In this sketch he searchesfor a pair
of complementaryhexachordscomprisedof pitches non-adjacentin the
row but still equivalent to the principalhexachord of the basic set. He
has written two combinatoriallyrelatedrow forms which I have labelled
PO and Is. Schoenberghas stemmed the pitches of the first and third
trichords of Is and connected them with a beam, and done likewise
7

Used by permission of Belmont Music Publishers, Los Angeles, CA.

(transcription)

I
II I

I

I

I

j~~~
I

I

[P01

db

IF)

(j

11
11
I

"I I

d

i
I

ir t 'r 'i
. .
I

I

i

I

b

Example2. Sketch for StringQuartetNo. 4,

8

a,44

F

(I

37
Op. (#1 03 1)

with the pitches of the second and fourth trichords. This procedure
divides the row into two complementaryhexachords,each containing
non-adjacentpitches in the row. (Notice that the verticallines between
the row forms indicate the pitches occupying similarpositions in both
row forms.) Schoenberghas also considereda second pair of complementary hexachordswhich he indicated with beams above P. The first
beam connects non-adjacentpitches with order numbers 1, 3, 4, 7, 9,
and 10; the second beam connects pitches with the remainingorder
numbers 2, 5, 6, 8, 11, and 12. Schoenbergapparentlydecided, however, that this second pair of hexachordswas unsatisfactoryand crossed
out the hexachord indicated by the second beam above P. Whatwas
wrong with this pair of hexachords?If one examines the structureof
both pairs of hexachords, one discovers that only the pair marked
below Is is equivalent to linear segments of the row. In fact, they
represent transpositionsor inversions (or both) of the principalhexahis
chord. Probablyas an aid to memory, Schoenbergsummarized findin the table to the right of the sketch. Notice that below Is he has
ings
labelled the trichordswith the letters d, b, c, and a, and then tabulated
all the possible pairingsof trichords,using a vertical line to mark the
four trichord pairs (db, ac, ab, and ca) which represent either the
principalhexachordsor equivalentforms of the principalhexachords.19
The method shown in Example 2 works throughout the Fourth
Quartet to generateharmonicstructure,but it also providesa foundation for the larger-scalestructures that are the topic of this essay. In
Example 3 the same method-use of hexachords equivalent to the
principalhexachords of the row-can be seen structuringthe opening
theme of the first movement. The theme consists of a melody presented
three instruby the first violin with an accompanimentby the remaining
ments. The melody contains one complete statement of the basic set
partitioned into four trichords, which I have marked a, b, c, and d.
The other instruments accompany each trichord of the melody with
three chords representingthe three remainingtrichordsof the row. The
phrase thus contains four complete statements of the same row form,
and each accompanyingchord, taken with the melodic trichord,forms
a hexachord that is either a linear segment of the row or equivalentto
one. Upper case letters show the successionof hexachordsin the phrase
and their equivalent forms in the basic set. Like Example 1, Example3
displays two harmonic dimensions derived from the basic set. The
primary dimension simply representsfour complete statements of the
row, while the secondary dimension binds together the melody and
accompanimentby hexachords either identical or equivalentto linear
segments of the row. If we neglect Schoenberg's redefination of
harmoniesby their intervalliccontent ratherthan pitch content, we will
9

A

Allegro molto, energico
a~~~
rIr

r

A-

-1

AIA A

I

A

A

I

b
JH.7FI---b

-, r

A

ff

i ~~
?r4

A
A

~

A

c
A

A

B

9

A

%d

a

b

A

A

A

B

A~~~~~~fC

b

A

A

A

A

d g-a

A

BasicSe-.' D C-sharp A,,B-flat F E-flat"E C A-flat,,G F-sharpB'
B
B

37,
Example3. StringQuartetNo. 4, Op. mm. 1-6

10

Copyright 1939 by G. Schirmer, Inc., New York.
Used by permission.

be mystified here by his claim to deriveall harmonicdimensionsfrom a
singlebasic set.20
Examples 1 and 3 show Schoenbergassociatingnon-adjacentpitches
of the basic set to create equivalentforms of the principalhexachord
and using these hexachords to connect several harmonic dimensions
within a single row form. Perhapsmore often, this same techniquebinds
together several different row forms, creating a harmonic dimension
that determines the length of an individual phrase. Consider, for
example, a phrase from the Suite, Op. 29, (Ex. 4), which contains four
combinatoriallyrelated row forms, labelledP9, 12, 4, and Pll. Schoenberg's designationof the principalvoices by the signs "H-" and "N-,"
dividesthe phraseinto these two melodic voices and an accompaniment.
If we examine the harmonic structure of these voices, each of which
contain pitches extracted from four different row forms, we discover
that Schoenberg repeatedly uses forms of the principalhexachordto
connect the four row forms into a single phrase. The voice marked
"H-" unfolds two occurrences of the principal hexachord (marked
"A") each containing pitches from two different row forms. Moreover, the entire voice of fourteen pitches contains only six different
pitch-classesand thus unfolds only one form of this hexachord. The
voice marked "N-" unfolds nine pitches but contains only six pitchclasses, which make one occurrence of the principal hexachord.
(Notice that the hexachord is completed only with the entrance of
the final pitch, B flat.) Becauseit spans all four row forms, this voice
definesthe length of the phraseand also binds it into an indivisibleunit.
The principalhexachord of the basic set lends itself well to this kind of
and has only four distinct
phrase structure, for it is all-combinatorial
forms. Example 4 clearly shows, then, how intervallicpropertiesof the
basic set can generate discrete phrases.It now is possible to understand
more clearly why Schoenberghas included markingsdesignatingthe
principalvoices. It is not merely to arbitrarilycreate a familiartonal
texture of theme and accompaniment, but rather to indicate those
voices unfolding discrete secondaryharmonicdimensionswhich define
and unify individualphrases.It is importantto note that these secondary
dimensionsare derivedfrom twelve-tone proceduresalone and are not
in any sense dependentupon tonal procedures.21
One common view of Schoenberg's techniques for structuring
phrases has been analogous to the standardcriticism of his harmonic
harmonic
structure:the row itself judged to be incapableof generating
texturesor extended forms, followed by the conclusion that Schoenberg
has had to impose an arbitraryorder, one not derivedfrom the row.
Phrases,in this view, are delineatedby changesin textural, rhythmic,
or dynamic patterns.22 These surface features do, of course, mark
phrasesin Schoenberg'stwelve-tonemusic, but they do not account for
11

P9,

14

12

Pit

41.
A

A
BasicSet: A D-flat C E A-flat F'F-sharp E-flat D B-flat B G'

Example4. Suite, Op. 29, Overture,mm. 105-108
Copyright 1929 by Universal Edition, A.G. Vienna.
Used by permission.

-

*

7

1910 12-

t
: 12

s

'

t

Example5. WindQuintet, Op. 26, Andante
12

Copyright 1925 by Universal Edition, A.G. Vienna.
Used by permission.

the shapethese phrasestake, that is, they do not explain what determines
the unity of these phrases. This common view is as superficial as an
account of sentencestructurethat attendedonly to commasand periods.
A second, more fruitful, approachemphasizesthe use of invariantsand
the combinatorialproperty to provide continuation and association.23
Even this approach is less than complete for it often fails to explain
what determinesthe shape and unity of discretephrases.In Example4,
for instance, the combinatorialproperty explains why these four row
forms are associated, but not why only four row forms appear.Moreover, while invariants insure smooth continuation between the four
row forms, they again do not account for the unity of the phrase. In
this example, the unity of the phraseis determinedby the violin line
whose derivationis not directly dependent on either the combinatorial
propertyor invariants.
An additional example from "Composition With Twelve Tones"
exhibits a second important method for buildingindividualphrases.In
the lecture Schoenberguses the opening theme of the third movement
of the Wind Quintet, Op. 26, which appears in Example 5, to
demonstratewhathe calls a more "complicatedprocedurefor constructing themes." Within the theme, he says, there is a definite regularityin
the distribution of tones, but he stops there, shrinking from an
explanation that he says in an early versionof the lecture would be too
complex.24 Example 5 is indeed complex, and I will point out only one
of its more interesting features. The example consists of three repetitions of a single row form; thus, its primary dimension of harmonic
structure is simply the ordered presentation of the row. A secondary
dimension of harmonicstructureunfolds in the uppervoice, played by
the horn. Notice that the successivepitches in this voice are mostly nonadjacent in the basic set. But in fact this upper voice consists of
exactly the twelve pitches of the row and spans all three row forms.
Even though the upper voice does not follow the order of the row, it
does contain all of its pitches and consequently has the same total
intervallic content. It is this secondary dimension of harmonic structure which joins the three repetitions of the basic set into a single
phrase, and which Schoenberg referred to as a "more complicated
procedurefor constructingthemes."25
The desire to systematizefurtherthis procedurefor buildingphrases
led Schoenbergto some of his most experimentalcompositions,including the StringQuartetNo. 3, Op. 30, and the StringTrio, Op. 45. In the
Third String Quartet, for example, he uses not one, but three different
forms of the basic set, even though in "Composition With Twelve
Tones" he explicitly rejectsusing more than one. His row tables for the
ThirdQuartet,partiallyreproducedin Example6, show that in all three
forms of the basic set, the first five pitches occur in the same order,
13

Example6. Sketch for StringQuartetNo. 3, Op. 3

Used by perm

while the last seven pitches occur in three different orders.Schoenberg
N
labels the principalending as "M1 " (Mittelsatz Nachsatzl) and the
two variantsas "M2N2" and "M3N3."26 We can discoverwhy Schoenberg has ignored his own principle that a composition have only one
basic set if we analyze how he uses the three sets to design mutlidimensionalharmonic structures. One particularlyingenious structure
integratesthe second principaltheme of the first movement. Example7
shows the theme as it appears in what we might loosely call the
beginning of the Recapitulation. It consists of six different row
permutations (Pl, RIlo, Pll, Io, I4, RPi) which employ all three
alternative orderings.The first permutation,PI, for example, uses the
third ending which I have indicated by the (3) following the row label;
the second permutation, RI10, uses the first ending, indicated by the
(1); and so forth. Schoenberguses these alternativeendingsto construct
a melody that spans and integrates the entire phrase. This melody,
presented by the cello, uses two pitches from each row form and
unfolds an ordered permutation of the principal basic set, labelled
P7. The two pitches from each row form played by the cello always
represent order numbers6 and 7, or 11 and 12 in the row they come
from. Schoenberghas used only pitches with these order numbersin
order to partition each row form into two five-note segments and one
two-note segment, a partition which characterizesand dominates the
entire movement. The alternative endings are thus required if the
necessaryintervalsare to appearat these two points in the row. In contrast to Example 5, the harmonic dimensionthat forms the phrasenot
only duplicates the intervalliccontent of the basic set (as of course it
must), but also maintainsits exact successionof intervals.
This example also displays the third, and perhapsmost importantof
Schoenberg's techniques for building individual phrases. Within the
accompanyingvoices he binds together successive row forms by constructingharmoniesequivalentto linearsegmentsof the basic set. These
segments, however, are not limited to the principalhexachord, or the
universalset, but occur in various sizes. The first violin, for example,
unfolds a two-barharmony (markedA) which spans the first two row
forms and is equivalent to the final seven-notesegment of the principal
basic set (M1N1). The second violin likewise unfolds a two-bar
harmony which spans the first two row forms (marked "B") and is
equivalent to the nine-note segment markedB on the principalbasic
set. A similarstructurebinds the next two row forms together with two
different forms of the same eight-note harmony, markedC, which are
equivalent to the linear segment marked C on the principalbasic set.
The final two row forms are connected in the same way by two
harmonies equivalent to the first seven-note segment of the principal
basic set, marked D. Notice that because none of these equivalent
15

harmonies have the same succession of intervalsas the basic set, they
relate to the basic set primarilythroughtotal intervalliccontent.27
Example 7 shows Schoenbergcarefully associatingvariousorderings
of the basic set in order to build a complex but unitary phrase.This
phrase depends upon large harmonies,containing seven, eight, or nine
pitches; earlier examples depended upon harmonies of six or twelve
pitches. In general Schoenberg seems willing to use harmonies of any
size from the basic set to connect the multiple dimensionsof harmonic
structure, though he perhaps tends to prefer smaller ones. Consider,
for example, the opening theme for the first movement again of the
Third Quartet shown in Example 8a. It consists of two repetitions of
the row form P7 which uses the first and second alternateorderingsof
the basic set, respectively.The entire line presented by the first violin
unfolds pitches contained in the final seven-note segment of the basic
set, and the second violin and viola present the first five-note segment
of the basic set. Of special interest is the four-noteharmonypresented
by the cello which spans the entire theme and consists of the sixth and
seventh pitches of both alternativeforms of the row. Notice that even
though these pitches are not adjacentin either form, they nevertheless
are equivalentto the harmonymarkedC on the basic set. A brief sketch
for this theme, shown in Example 8b, shows Schoenbergmarkingwith
brackets and bar lines this important harmonic relation. This sketch
leaveslittle doubt that he regardsthese four pitches as a singleharmony,
and their prominent position in the opening theme reflects their
specialimportance.
These last two examples are particularlyinterestingfor they show
that Schoenbergis willing to modify one of the principaltenets of his
system, that a composition should have only one basic set, in orderto
produce harmonicallyintegratedphrases.These phrasesin turn, are the
basic units, the building blocks of his extended forms. The remaining
examples will further illustrate more extended forms and show how
Schoenberg'sconcept of "developingvariation" grows from the same
multiple dimensionsof harmonicstructurediscussedabove.
Throughout his writings, Schoenberg consistently stresses the
importance of "harmonic" or "developing variation" for building
extended forms, but he fails to say how to managevariationby twelvetone techniques alone. Repetition, he says, is the basic principle of
musical form, because form depends upon motives and motives can
only be recognizedif they are repeated. Non-primitivemusic, he says,
conceals its repetitions through variation and development, methods
which allow forms to be built or shaped.28Schoenbergdefines variation
as "changing some of the less important features of a musical idea,
while preservingthe more important ones."29 The changing features
create new ideas or themes, while the preserved features insure
16

Pll (2)

RIlo(L)

P (3)

Io(2)

RP,O)

14(3)

D
8

I,

9
.- :'',.

I

0

II

12

r,

.a ,

I

-

<.10

. ffi
*

f d

/

__/\

118

D

-

-

Tt

r

^
lirfV8

_

r

1 l'

'r 1

f./

D
C
BasicSet: G E' D-sharp A C F'F-sharp/ B B-flat D-flat A-flat D
__

A

__

\

B

Example 7. String Quartet No. 3, Op. 30, mm. 174-180
Copyright 1927 by Universal Edition, A.G. Vienna.
Used by permission.

17

b>

bA).

6

T
_

B-

l-

3

E 'r

9

K e

5

4

-- -

?

-

-

1

p

12

gR

-

'3

2

34 2

4

t

7
P
11

P7(2)

aJ

r^

R

-

zr

_

t *,
1.J .^.^

IA,

-}

B
A
BasicSet (1): 'G E D-sharp A C" FF-sharp B B-flat C-sharp,G-sharp
D'
C

Example8a. StringQuartetNo. 3, mm. 5-12
Copyright 1927 by Universal Edition, A.G. Vienna.
Used by permission.

C,
P7(l)
P7(2)
I

I

C
8b. Sketch for StringQuartetNo. 3 (#999)
Example
18

Used by permission

of Belmont Music Publishers, Los Angeles, CA.

coherence of form. It would seem that development differs from
variationin that it changesorganicallyin a single directiontowardsome
end. Variations can also change organically, of course, but to that
extent they may be said to develop, ratherthan simply vary.
In "Composition With Twelve Tones," Schoenberg says that the
basic set functions as the motive, and its repetitionwith what he terms
"developingvariation" generates form. The phrase "developingvariation" seems to insist on an integral and organic relation among the
varied repetitions of the basic set. Schoenberg does discuss several
examples of developingvariationin his lecture, but, as we soon discover
from his sketches, his methods are more complex than he was able, or
willing, to explain.
One example, from the Suite, Op. 29, will demonstratethe variation
uses to associatetwo phrasesin order to construct
techniqueSchoenberg
the "A" sections of a small ABA form. In a sketch for the Suite,
(Ex. 9a), Schoenbergwrites "Wiederbreit, wie vorher (33)," referring
to measure 33 where "wieder breit" previously occurred. The two
passages appear in Examples 9b and 9c. Even though their soprano
lines contain the same pitches (F sharp,G, D flat, C), differencesin row
forms, texture, instrumentation, and rhythm apparently conceal the
formal connection suggestedby the expressivemarkingand specifiedin
the sketch. If we look more closely, however-beyond those tonal conventions Boulez finds so reactionary-we find that these phrasesare not
connected merely by a mood or tempo marking,but that the primary
and secondary harmonic dimensionsin both passagesare very similar.
This feature is concealed from immediate view because the vertical
harmoniesof the earlierpassageconsist of pitches that are adjacentin
the row, while in the later passagethey consist of pitches that are nonadjacent. But, nevertheless,equivalentforms of the tetrachordsmarked
"A" and "B" on the basic set dominate the verticalharmoniesof both
passages. It is significant that only these two tetrachordsappearmore
than once as linear segments of the basic set: tetrachord"A" occurs
twice, and tetrachord"B" appearsthree times.
By emphasizingthe same verticalharmoniesin both passages,even
though in the first they are formed from adjacent pitches in the basic
set and in the second largely from non-adjacentpitches, Schoenbergis
able to vary, but at the same time associate,two separatepassages.This
example helps us to understand more clearly Schoenberg's idea of
"developingvariation"in which nonessentialfeatures of a musicalidea
can change while essential ones recur.In this example,the nonessential
features such as texture, instrumentation,and rhythm change almost
beyond recognition, while the essentialfeature, the harmonicstructure,
remains constant. This example also exposes the naivete of Boulez's
criticism of Schoenberg's principle of developing variation. Boulez
19

*4~~
,l e

Example9a. SkizzenbuchV (Sk 612): Suite, Op. 29, Overture
Used by permission of Belmont Music Publishers, Los Angeles, CA.

(Pi )

(RP,)
3
C=-L-"

10

9

L

3

~~~~~5
~ ~

8

9

10

11

1

VI.
2ij

_1

11

Vc

8

522

):

__

'--I

9-v-

A BAB

r -'

-r--Tj

C

D C

_

_

_

I

A

C

A

Example9b. Suite, Overture,mm. 33-37
Copyright 1929 by Universal Edition, A.G. Vienna.
Used by permission.

20

(11)

(P6)

Pf

-r-

(P6)

'-*-' -

L-r-

A

r

B

B

-r-'
"

B

E

B

1

7

1

-r
A A

-'

r'

E

'I-r

B

B

s bbr
4

3 :

j

. -

.
;t / I f6 b2
Q

q
^(

?F

.B BI

B
I

B

B

B

B

l

0

.

?

y^

b

AB

A

E
B
'
A
C
'A
BasicSet: 'D-flat F \EA-flat"C Aj\B-flat G F-sharp D/ E-flat B'
/
B
B
D

Example9c. Suite, Overture,mm. 47-49
Copyright 1929 by Universal Edition, A.G. Vienna.
Used by permission.

21

arguesthat becausethe row must maintaina fixed intervallicsuccession,
it demands a strict contrapuntaltreatment and thus can not be easily
combined with harmonicvariation.This argumentneglects completely
the severaldimensionsof harmonicstructure-and their use in achieving
form-that Schoenbergdevelopedfrom twelve-toneproceduresalone.
The concluding examples will show, though only briefly, several
techniques Schoenberguses to generateform in the StringTrio, Op. 45,
a composition commonly regardedas among his most ambitious, but
also among his most problematic.His sketchesshow him extending and
systematizing proceduresthat appear in the previous examples. Most
students of the String Trio have mistakenly described it as a hexachordal composition, meaning that it is based not upon a twelve-tone
of
row, but on differentorderings combinatoriallyrelatedhexachords.30
The row tables for the String Trio, partiallyshown in Example 10,
indicate that Schoenberguses not a groupof hexachords,but two basic
sets: the first set contains eighteen pitches, and the second containsthe
usual twelve. In the eighteen-noteset, labelled "Basic Set No. 1," the
first and last hexachordscontain identical pitches, but they are ordered
differently. The twelve-note basic set, labelled "Basic Set No. 2," is a
variation on Basic Set No. 1; its first hexachord is identical to that of
Basic Set No. 1, and its second hexachord contains the same pitches,
but in a different order, as the second hexachordof Basic Set No. 1. In
his row tables, Schoenbergassociateseach prime form of the basic set
with the combinatoriallyrelated row form that relatesby Is, and both
row formsalwaysappearon the same system and unfold simultaneously.
Notice that in the tables for Basic Set No. 1, Schoenberg stemmed
has
separatelythe first and last pitches of every hexachord. This produces
from each pair of row forms twelve pitch-classes,which form a kind of
secondary basic set. Throughout the String Trio, when Schoenberg
presents two combinatoriallyrelated row forms, he frequently creates
an extra harmonic dimension containing only the twelve pitches that
begin and end the hexachords and that he stemmed separatelyin the
row tables. And it is this dimension which often spans and unifies
individualphrases.
One typical example, shown in Example 11, appears shortly after
the introduction, and presentssuccessivelytwo combinatoriallyrelated
row forms, P2 and 17. The secondarybasic set, comprised of the first
and last pitches of every hexachord, appearsin the violin, the principal
voice marked "P". It is this harmonic dimension, comprisedprimarily
of non-adjacentpitches extracted from two row forms, that delineates
the phrase. It is important to understand precisely how the combinatorialpropertyaffects the structureof this phrase.Most importantly
it insures equal pitch-class distribution throughout the phrase, even
thoughthe row itself contains repeatedpitches. Whilethe combinatorial
22

BasicSet No. 1
...,

I
/, Mia 1,t'.
KMF
Y ,t %
I I

7\L -V
I
r

I

-

I - -.

, Ji. ,' ,b ;r .
.
r
f >s u .
7

I
^ N6tkr

l~l~
If

*

.

A
I

.. -

frK
Ki.
.-'

.

-4-4'I
*

I
- I r-

-7-

I

VWYlr

l

-l

t

~tC
I'

hr

0t!k
y

#

Example 10. Sketchesfor StringTrio, Op. 45 (#1

Used by permission of B

P2
. ni

P
J. s
90

r- pLzz-

5
9?

7

r

n.EC
>l

12

r
Fb

~

'

j ?

~

,

?

5^

Si

f1

y

|3 1 .

:

|I

0

Yf

Irt

tel

13
R

18
carco

1,8

| (

a

iF

'

o (?i)

14

o,7

(f)

..

1z

,

*-

r

-

!L -

16

14 16

oJL

jpiz.

*oC

15

15

1

3

2

7X,1o
I?.

I =

4-

,

_

1-

,_

._

1-

I
I
B
C
A
BasicSet No. 1: D' Bflat E-flat A E D-flat B /A-flat CGflatG F' C E'DB-flat A D-flat'E-flat

Example 11. String Trio (Part I), mm. 12-17
Copyright 1976 by Boelke-Bomart Publications, Hillsdale, NY.
Used by permission.

24

between measures14 and 15, it in no
property does form one aggregate
or forms the harmonic dimension that determines the
way requires
phrase.To assumethat in his later compositions Schoenbergdependson
the combinatorialproperty to structurephrases,is to tell less than half
the story: a misleading half, for Schoenberg in fact uses the same
techniques to structure phrases in both his combinatorial and noncombinatorialcompositions.
The next examples further clarify Schoenberg'sconcept of developing variationand show how it can generatelarge formalsections. Again
the String Trio provides the example because of its experimentaland
enigmatic form. Even a cursory glance through the sketches calls into
question one of Boulez's important assertions: that "Schoenbergwas
not much preoccupied with the problem of forms."31 Consider, for
example, part of a table from his sketches for the StringTrio, shown in
Example 12. Here Schoenberg has tabulated the duration of every
phrasein both beats and seconds, and arrivedat a balancewithin each
part of the composition and among all parts. Notice how his measurement in seconds accommodates the frequent changes in tempo and
indicates a form that would not be suggestedby merely counting the
numberof beats or measuresin each part.
The String Trio consists of a single movement which is dividedinto
five sections labelled Part I, Episode I, Part II, Episode II and PartIII.
Schoenbergbases PartsI and II on the eighteen-notebasic set (Basic Set
No. 1), and Episodes I and II on the twelve-note basic set (Basic Set
No. 2). Example 11 shows the three linear tetrachords,marked "A,"
"B," and "C," that make up the principalmotivic materialof Part I. As
the phrasein Example 11 indicates,these are the three tetrachordsthat
remain after Schoenberg separates the first and last pitches of each
hexachord to form a separate harmonic dimension. Not surprisingly,
tetrachords A, B, and C get special emphasis.Not only do they often
comprise the principalvoices, but equivalent forms of them also often
appearin the accompanyingvoices, formedby associatingnon-adjacent
pitches in the basic set. Withvery few exceptions, every phraseof Part I
simultaneouslyunfolds multiple occurrencesof these tetrachords;they
consequently dominateits harmonicstructure.
Schoenberg builds the twelve-note basic set for Episode I around
tetrachordsA and C as linearsegments,and developsthis feature in one
of the principal themes for Episode I (shown in Example 13). The
principalvoice of the theme unfolds tetrachordsC and A, but not as
they occuras linear segments.Instead,Schoenberguses new forms made
by associating non-adjacentpitches in the basic set, those with order
numbers 1, 2, 4, 6 and order numbers 7, 8, 10, 12. In addition two
other dimensionsof harmonicstructurealso repeat forms of tetrachords
A and C. The viola plays one form of tetrachord C comprised of
25

4=66
?
Jt-eo

'^ r I/ 4

d1.=
t-tw

12

6

/f

*^qo

It

I

/6

6t

17r

3

(2..

3/

/Z

-4)
t1

?7

(0

7

(

J -o
4__

<23 ^
6S

3

.s

..
.

~Y

z4

Z

46 ,Z . JI

)=7t
-

J
TART

zqo

92 -6 S6 <I i

v40

(p

/ 8

-/ a
/5.

7

7
// /6 I
f
O/ by

-

S
.(-^21 .8
.

6

.1.-fS
(I-

acMi- 21

K /AK,o'o

~/2X
/[/r

,r. I

4 a- 2t.
.3

iP^rt

-

........

. .

3,%,
Example 12. Sketch for StringTrio (#1067)

26

Example 12 (continued)
Used by permission of Belmont Music Publishers, Los Angeles, CA.

27

a tempo
6P
Plo

7

4

r"-`

(
1 IIt_i;- (^iJ4t)j
~c
CA

10

is

;
I

~~~~A

C
Lt

I|C-

3
p

..9

111

o' a
'"r L_

7 IF-

.1

---:

2

C-

13

[:y y r

3.

L

5
6 ~,,,,,

jP-

3,

BasicSet No.2 :\B-flat

7
8-

y

1

N

a

-

IfFY
i-

9
1L
'

- A

11
h

12

s4

-J:' I

11ir

A
A
G-flat B F C "A D C-sharp,E G E-flat A-flat,
C
C

Example 13. StringTrio (Episode I), mm. 85-86
Copyright 1976 by Boelke-Bomart
Used by permission.

28

Publications,

Hillsdale, NY.

pitches with ordernumbers3, 5, 9, 11, and this dimension
non-adjacent
both measures and makes them a single phrase. Moreover,the
joins
accompanyingvoices present the eight-note complement of tetrachord
C (marked"C")in the first measureand A (marked"A") in the second.
This last dimension is controlled by the combinatorialproperty, and
arises by joining the combinatorially related row forms P0l and I3.
Thus, this phrase has four simultaneousharmonic dimensions, all of
whichunfold equivalentforms of two tetrachordsor their complements.
It is essential to recognizethat all of the harmoniesmarkedin Example
13 are formed by pitches non-adjacentin the basic set or by pitches
from different row forms. This feature in Episode I develops the
motives of Part I, in which the principal voices (those marked "P")
present tetrachords A and C only as linear segments of the row. The
third principalmotive of PartI, tetrachordB, does not occur in Episode
I and must wait until Part II to be repeated or developed further.
EpisodeI is thus not a repetitionof Part I, for it omits essentialmotives.
Rather, it representsa variation, as well as a development of two of
the three principalmotives of Part I. We can perhapsnow understand
why Schoenbergrefers to this section as an Episode-it fulfills precisely
the function of the episodes of Baroquefugues by repeating,varying,
and developingelements of the principalthematicmaterial,and it does
so throughtwelve-toneproceduresalone.
The last example (Ex. 14), also from the String Trio, makes a final
later
Schoenberg's
point: that contemporarytheorists,by characterizing
works as hexachordalcompositions,have somewhatmisunderstoodand
obscured the innovative techniques he has developed for building
extended structures.Example 14 shows a phrasefrom Part II in which
tetrachord B returns; tetrachord B, you remember, was the only
principal motive of Part I not developed in Episode I. The phrasein
Example 14 unfolds four pairs of hexachords;each pair representsthe
second pair of hexachords formed by pairing combinatoriallyrelated
forms of the eighteen-note basic set. Three harmoniesstructure this
phrase,each of which representsa linear segment of the basic set. The
first is tetrachord B, the chromatic tetrachord,a form of which each
instrumentplaysonce in every measure;each measuretherefore consists
of three different forms of tetrachordB. The second structuralharmony
representsa hexachord, marked "D," which binds together the three
instrumentalparts. Each half measureunfolds this hexachord,which is
always comprisedof pitches from two row forms. The third structural
harmony, the whole-tone tetrachord, marked "E," binds together the
four measuresinto a single phrase.Notice that the transpositionsof the
four successiverow pairs-P1114, P9I2 and so forth-outline the wholetone tetrachord. Thus, although the harmonies that structure this
29

P,,

14

P92I

Moderato
icon lord,,. 9

B

t = 104
10

B

11

9

10

1

p
B

con sord.

con sord.

I

8

i-

o

2

P I
D

D

D

D

D

D

D

P318

P, 16

PlB

R

q

a

,I

Bk ,

A

sempre P

1 it
7.

a

D

9

B BO

H

10~~~~~~~~~
I

I
D

I

I

D
D

DBai: D

BasicSet No. 1: (PO) D A sharp DsharpA E Csharp
(Is) G B
Fsharp C F Gsharp

aB

D

E
Aflat FsharG

aBflat Dflat Eflat
D

DBflat)A Csharp Eflat
D E A/ F G B
CA flat Gflat
D
I
B
jcE

Example 14. StringTrio (PartII), mm. 148-151
Copyright 1976 by Boelke-Bomart Publications, Hillsdale, NY.
Used by permission.

30

phrase are formed by pitches from two or more row forms, they all
occur as linearsegmentsof the eighteen-notebasic set.
Contemporarytheorists have noted these structuralharmonies,but
have failed to recognize their ultimate source in the basic set. Instead
they have argued that the piece is structured on the harmonies
derived from pairs of combinatorialhexachords.32This argument can
sometimes find evidence. In the paired combinatorialrow forms at the
bottom of Example 14, for instance, two of the three structural
harmonies, marked "D" and "B," do in fact link together the paired
hexachords. But this argumentcan not explain the source of tetrachord
E, the whole-tone tetrachord that shapes the phrase, and so the
proponents of a hexachordalbasis for the String Trio can only assume
form. I certainlydo not
that Schoenberghas had to impose an arbitrary
want to maintainthat harmoniesformed by combinatorialhexachords
never representlinear segments of the row. Obviouslymany often do,
and no doubt Schoenbergdesignedhis basic set to develop this feature.
But it is undeniablethat many harmoniesformed by the pairedhexachords are not emphasized. Theorists have noted this fact with some
puzzlement, because they have not understoodthat Schoenberguses as
structuralharmonies only those that representlinear segments of the
basic set. Failure to recognize this principle is easy to understand.If
Schoenbergoften presents only one hexachord from a row form, why
not say that hexachords,ratherthan a basic set, control the piece? The
String Trio makes this view even more tempting, for its row no longer
contains only twelve pitches. Thus, it is easy, even attractive,to ignore
the fact that Schoenbergdoes usually presentthe complete row, and to
concentrate on the recurrenceof hexachordswhich appearto be freely
ordered, that is, not dictated by a basic set. In other words, theorists
have found it easier to relinquishthe concept of the basic set, then to
relinquishthe rule that a basic set contains twelve pitches. The sketches,
however, show precisely the opposite, that he was willing to relinquish
the rule that a basic set must contain twelve pitches, but not the
concept of a basic set itself as the source for the harmonicand formal
structureof his music.
manifesto "CompositionWithTwelve Tones," as
In that half-hearted
Schoenbergproposedthree fundamentalprinciples
everyoneremembers,
for his new method: that the basic set alone generate harmonic and
formal structure,that the basic set contain only twelve pitches with no
pitch repeated, and that a composition have only one basic set. But to
judge by his music and his sketches, we ought probably to see these
three principles arranged as a hierarchy. Schoenberg is willing to
modify and experiment with the latter two: the ThirdQuartetuses not
one but three orderingsof the basic set; the String Trio uses two basic
sets, one of which has eighteen notes. Neither the numberof basic sets
31

nor the number of pitches in each set is absolute, then, but if we
analyze pieces in which they are not absolute, we discover that
Schoenbergmodifies his principleswith the sole purpose of expanding
or redefining harmonies of the basic set in order to generate more
elaborate and integratedformal structures.The first principle-that the
structure and form of twelve-tone music derive from a basic set-is
absolute and in fact both motivates and controls departuresfrom the
secondaryprinciples.
Schoenberg'scritics, lacking the evidence of his sketches, have not
recognized that what seemed his inflated claims for his method were
actually its one absolute. They were mistaken, but in a sensejustified,
in complaining
that he went too far in discarding
techniquescomparable
to tonal harmonic functions or, like Boulez, that he did not go far
enough in developing uniquely twelve-tone techniques for producing
extended forms. And those contemporarytheorists who bend his most
important principleby identifying hexachordsas the bases for his later
music, confirm the criticisms of the skeptics-that he had to rely on
or
arbitrary contradictoryproceduresto build extended forms.
As he superstitously feared, Schoenberg died on Friday the 13th,
July 1951 in Los Angeles.But since the music he wrote and the methods
he invented prove less derivative and arbitrary,more coherent and
fruitful, than he cared to explain, we can confidently apply to Schoenbergwhat the poet said of Diirer,"Deadis he not, but departed-for the
artist never dies."33

32

For those who may find it useful, I list below the pitch-class set
names according to Forte's The Structure of Atonal Music for the
lettered pitch-classsets in the musicalexamples.
Example 1
A 6-2
Example2
a 3-4
b 3-9
c 3-12
d 3-4
ab: 6-16
ac 6-16
cd: 6-16
db: 6-16
Example3
a : 3-4
b 3-9
c :3-12
d 3-4
A 6-16
B 6-z48
B 6-z26
Example4
A 6-20
Example7
A 7-10
B 9-10
C 8-27
D 7-32

Example8
A: 7-32
B 5-32
C 4-14
Example9
A: 4-17
B: 4-19
C 4-10
D: 4-3
E: 4-7
Example 11
A: 4-9
B: 4-1
C 4-7
Example 13
A: 4-9
A 8-9
C 4-7
C 8-7
Example 14
B: 4-1
D: 6-32
E: 4-21

33

NOTES
This paper is an expanded and revised version of a lecture delivered at the
AMS/SMT National Conference in November, 1979.
1. "Schoenberg Is Dead," The Score 6 (1952), pp. 18-22. See also Boulez, Notes
OfAn Apprenticeship (New York: Alfred A. Knopf, Inc., 1968) and Conversations with Celestin Deliege (London: Eulenburg Books Ltd., 1976).
2. Milton Babbitt and David Lewin are most prominent among those who have
considered the same difficulties Boulez points to. See especially Babbitt,
"Some Aspects of Twelve-Tone Composition," The Score 12 (1955), pp. 5361; "Twelve-Tone Invariants as Compositional Determinants," The Musical
Quarterly 46 (1960), pp. 246-59; "Set Structure as a Compositional Determinant," Journal ofMusic Theory 5 (1961), pp. 72-94; and Lewin, "A Theory
of Segmental Association in Twelve-Tone Muisc," Perspectives of New Music
1 (1962), pp. 89-116; "A Study of Hexachord Levels in Schoenberg's Violin
Fantasy," Perspectives of New Music 6 (1967), pp. 18-32; "Inversional Balance
as an Organizing Force in Schoenberg's Music and Thought," Perspectives of
New Music 6 (1968), pp. 1-21.
3. Schoenberg's claim that the basic set regulates all harmonic and structural
elements has met with considerable skepticism, Skeptics assert that "licenses,"
such as reorderings, repetitions, and association of non-adjacent segments of
the basic set, as well as the verticalization of ordered segments to form
vertical harmonies, result in many events unrelated to the basic set and point
toward serious weaknesses in his twelve-tone method. This skepticism began
during Schoenberg's life and has continued until the present. The following
can fairly represent it: Richard S. Hill, "Schoenberg's Tone-Rows and the
Tonal System of the Future," The Musical Quarterly 22 (1936), pp. 14-37;
Ernst Krenek, "New Developments of the Twelve-Tone Technique," Music
Review 4 (1943), pp. 81-97; Peter Stadlen, "Serialism Reconsidered," The
Score 22 (1958), pp. 12-27; Seymour Shifrin, "A Note From the Underground," Perspectives of New Music 1 (1962), pp. 152-53; George Perle,
Serial Composition and Atonality (London: Faber and Faber Ltd., 1962),
pp. 61-110 and Twelve-tone Tonality (Berkeley and Los Angeles: University
of California Press, 1977), pp. 23-24. Various theorists and composers have
refused to interpret these "licenses" as weaknesses, but have not succeeded in
explaining how they are regulated by the basic set. See for example the
responses to Stadlen's article by Walter Piston, Roberto Gerhard, and Roger
Sessions, all in The Score 23 (1958), pp. 46-64. The inadequacies of these
responses is aptly pointed out by George Perle, "Theory and Practice in
Twelve-Tone Music," The Score 25 (1959), pp. 58-64. George Rochberg in his
review of Perle, Serial Composition and Atonality, harkens back to the earlier
responses by ignoring entirely Schoenberg's theoretical claim while explaining
away his "licenses" by appeal to creative genius (Journal of the American
Musicological Society, 16 [1963], pp. 413-18). Ren6 Leibowitz and Josef
Rufer, on the other hand, tend to ignore the whole issue and merely describe
uncritically Schoenberg's procedures and his use of classical forms. Babbitt
comments tellingly on the superficiality of this approach in his review of
Leibowitz, Schoenberg et son ecole (Paris: J. B. Janin, 1947) and Qu'est ce

34

que la musique de douze sons? (Liege: Editions Dynamo, 1948) in Journal of
the American Musicological Society 3 (1950), pp. 57-60, as does Krenek in
his remarks on Rufer, Die Komposition mit zwolf Tonen (Berlin: Max Hesses
Verlag, 1952) appearing in "Is The Twelve-Tone Technique on the Decline?"

TheMusicalQuarterly (1953), pp. 513-27.
39
4. "Schoenberg Is Dead," p. 20.
5. "Schoenberg Is Dead," p. 21, and see also "Trajectories: Ravel, Stravinsky,
Schoenberg" in Notes Of An Apprenticeship, pp. 256-58.
6. "Schoenberg Is Dead," p. 18.
7. The first passage is from "Problems of Harmony" in Style and Idea, ed.
Leonard Stein, trans. Leo Black (New York: St. Martins Press, 1975), p. 279;
the second from "Opinion Or Insight?" in Style and Idea, p. 263.
8. Schoenberg, "Composition With Twelve Tones (1)" in Style and Idea, p. 218.
9. "My Evolution" in Style and Idea, p. 88.
10. "Tonality and Form" in Style and Idea, p. 257.
11. For further discussion see my article "The Telltale Sketches: Harmonic
Structure in Schoenberg's 12-Tone Method," The Musical Quarterly 66
(1980), forthcoming.
12. Schoenberg, "Vortrag / 12 T K / Princeton," ed. Claudio Spies, Perspectives of
New Music 12 (1974), p. 83.
13. "Composition With Twelve Tones (1)," p. 235. In the following examples I
have added standard row labellings, letter labels of pitch-class sets, and the
basic set below each example. Appendix I gives Forte's pitch-class set names
for the lettered pitch-class sets in the following examples.
14. The pitch-class content of the complementary hexachords in this secondary
harmonic dimension further suggests that Schoenberg was aware of this
compositional procedure; each contains the same pitch-classes as the complementary hexachords in P6, the only transposition of the basic set used in
the entire composition. I owe this insight, as well as a thorough and generous
reading of my manuscript, to David Lewin.
15. See, for example, Perle, Serial Composition and Atonality, pp. 99, 109-10.
16. For further warrant for this inference see Boulez, "Schoenberg's Piano Works"

in Notes Of An Apprenticeship, 375.
p.
17. "Vortrag / 12 T K / Princeton," p. 88.
18. This and all other sketches discussed in this paper represent hitherto unpublished sketch material in the Arnold Schoenberg Institute, University of
Southern California, Los Angeles, California. The catalogue number for each
sketch appears with the example.
19. Schoenberg has worked out a second harmonic structure indicated by the
lettering "c" and "d" at the top of the sketch. While he uses this structure
later in the second movement, it does not apply to the example under discussion.
20. See Boulez's confusion about precisely this example in "Trajectories: Ravel,
Stravinsky, Schoenberg," Notes Of An Apprenticeship, pp. 256-57, and in
Boulez On Music Today (Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1971),
p. 132.
21. For further discussion of the Suite, Op. 29, see my dissertation, "Schoenberg's Concept of Multi-Dimensional Twelve-Tone Music: A Theoretical
Study of the Music and Compositional Sketches" (Yale University, 1977).

35

22. See, for example, Perle, Serial Composition and Atonality, pp. 123-28.
23. See Note 3 for the most important articles that deal specifically with combinatoriality and invariant properties.
24. "Vortrag / 12 T K / Princeton," p. 99.
25. For a more detailed analysis of this example, see "The Telltale Sketches"
which was somewhat anticipated by Professors Reinhold Brinkmann and
Jonathan Khuner in letters to the editor of the Journal of the Arnold
SchoenbergInstitute 1 (1976-77), 182-89.
26. Included with the sketches for Op. 30 is a second row table (#1003) in which
the reorderings of the basic set (M2N2, M3N3) are different from those shown
in Example 6. This table, notated in English, was prepared in 1935 for a class
in Los Angeles, eight years after Schoenberg completed the composition. I
owe this information to Leonard Stein. While I can not explain why the two
row tables do not show the same reorderings of the basic set, it is clear that the
principal ones for the first movement are those appearing in Example 6
(#1002).
27. In Example 7 I have used the second theme as it appears in the "recapitulation" because its secondary harmonic dimensions are somewhat less complicated than in the "exposition." In its first appearance, the secondary
harmonic dimensions derive from the second form of the basic set, perhaps
suggesting a modulation away from the principal form; in its second appearance, the secondary harmonic dimensions derive only from the principal row
form, implying a return ("recapitulation") to what Schoenberg considered the
principal form of the basic set. In this and the following examples I do not discuss the role of invariants in structuring phrases because this technique has
been investigated by other theorists (see note 3 above).
28. "For a Treatise On Composition" in Style and Idea, pp. 265-66.
29. Fundamentals of Musical Composition (New York: St. Martin's Press, 1967),
p. 8.
30. See, for example, George Rochberg, The Hexachord and its Relation to the
12-tone Row (Bryn Mawr: Theodore Presser, 1955), pp. 4, 40.
31. "Schoenberg Is Dead," p. 20.
32. See, for example, George Rochberg, "The Harmonic Tendency of the Hexachord," Journal of Music Theory 3 (1959), pp. 218-30.
33. Henry Wadsworth Longfellow, "Nuremberg" in The Complete Poetical Works
of Longfellow (Boston: Houghton-Mifflin, 1893), p. 57.

36

