WHAT YOU SEE IS WHAT YOU GET: ON VISUALIZING MUSIC

Eric Isaacson
Indiana University School of Music
Department of Music Theory
Bloomington, IN 47405 USA
isaacso@indiana.edu

ABSTRACT
Though music is fundamentally an aural phenomenon, we
often communicate about music through visual means.
The paper examines a number of visualization techniques
developed for music, focusing especially on those developed for music analysis by specialists in the ﬁeld, but also
looking at some less successful approaches. It is hoped
that, by presenting them in this way, those in the MIR
community will develop a greater awareness of the kinds
of musical problems music scholars are concerned with,
and might lend a hand toward addressing them
Keywords: visualization, analysis, harmony

1 INTRODUCTION
Though music is fundamentally an aural phenomenon,
we very often communicate about music through visual
means. A musical picture converts the unidirectional time
of a piece of music into a spatially represented dimension.
This allows us to view a musical work as if it were a physical object–we can examine it in any order, at any pace,
comparing temporally detached events with a simple ﬂit
of the eye.
Used in conjunction with a music-theoretically sound
concept of musical structure, pictures can be effective
tools for both discovering and conveying musical information. Different methods allow us to view snapshots of
a musical work taken from different vantage points. No
tool can provide a complete picture of a work, however,
so researchers must keep in mind what their goals are, and
what tools are most appropriate to achieve them.
This has implications for Music Information Retrieval
(MIR), because musical visualizations are often direct reﬂections of an underlying musical representation, and the
choice of a representation impacts directly on what musical features can be searched. It is important, therefore,
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this
work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for proﬁt or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full
citation on the ﬁrst page.
c 2005 Queen Mary, University of London

that researchers consider carefully the underlying representation and its outwardly expressed visualization when
implementing music IR tasks. Visual representations have
great explanatory power. It is also important, however,
that they be properly grounded in both musical knowledge
and an understanding of human cognition. When poorly
designed, or based on an incorrect understanding of the
underlying musical structure, however, they can mislead.
The purpose of this paper is to consider some ways
in which musicians and scholars have proposed we picture music and what role they might play in MIR tasks.
The paper will focus on visualization approaches that involve music analysis, whose aim is to explain or illuminate characteristics of a musical work. The techniques discussed touch on several musical features, including pitch
and rhythm, form, texture, and structural hierarchies. The
focus is on Western music–and primarily on art music,
though the principles generalize readily to popular musics. Some visualization techniques will be found to be
less effective than others. Some of the techniques are
already technology-based, others are carried out strictly
manually. It is hoped that, by presenting them in this way,
those in the MIR community will develop a greater awareness of the kinds of musical problems music scholars are
concerned with, and might lend a hand toward addressing
them.

2 COMMON MUSIC NOTATION
Although not itself analytical, because so much music
analysis is derived from music notation in some way, it
is worth considering ﬁrst what Western notation does and
does not represent. So-called Common Music Notation
(CMN) traces its origins to the Middle Ages, with a number of important reﬁnements taking place in the Renaissance, and additional incremental modiﬁcations occurring
since then. It developed to more easily preserve the extensive plainchant repertoire of the Roman Catholic church,
which was previously carried on through oral tradition.
The primary purpose of CMN was thus, and in fact still
remains, to facilitate the performance of a musical composition, by serving as a guide to performers. In much the
same way that the written word allowed languages to be
codiﬁed and for literature to emerge, the development of
music notation facilitated the emergence of the concept of
a musical work–an artefact that could be reliably passed

389

Figure 1: Score reduction of Beethoven, Symphony No. 5, Mvt. 1, measures 1-24.

Figure 2: Timeplot showing relative lengths of notated measures in a recorded performance of Beethoven’s Symphony
No. 5, Mvt. 1, measures 1-24.

along to later generations.
Our notation system embodies a number of metaphors
that both reﬂect and shape how we understand music.
Primary among these is the notion that pitches are discrete objects that exist in spatial relationships: one note
is “higher” and “longer” than another. These basic
spatial metaphors lead to others: scale degrees are arranged in “steps”; melodies “ascend” and “descend”; we
speak of “big sounds,” “thick textures,” of motives being
“stretched” or “compressed”; we speak of not just “voice
leading,” but “smooth” voice leading; we speak of “soft”
dynamics, “hard” attacks, “harsh” dissonances, melodic
“shape,” and musical “form.” (See Hatten, 1995, and
Zbikowski, 2002, for recent discussions of metaphor in
music.)
The musical score horizontally represents the temporal order of events left-to-right. The vertical dimension
expresses multiple variables, particularly in a complex orchestral score. Within a part, pitch height is determined
by the height of a notehead on the staff (relative to the
clef). Staves are grouped together in order of instrumental range, ﬁrst within instrument families (e.g., piccolo,
ﬂutes, alto ﬂute) and then between instrument families
(ﬂutes, oboes, clarinets, bassoons). Finally, the families
themselves are grouped together (woodwinds, brass, percussion, strings). The ordering is designed to optimize
reading by the conductor. (The musical score itself was a
later development; many vocal works in the Renaissance
existed only as individual part books–one for soprano, one
for alto, and so on.)
Music notation reﬂects many centuries of accumulated
user feedback and collective wisdom. Properly interpreting the intention of a score is more than a matter of reading the notation, however. In addition to understanding
the symbols, there are a host of performance conventions
that affect the interpretation of those symbols. Some of
these include the addition of improvised ornamentation,

390

determining when notated repeat signs are to be followed,
knowing when the seventh note of the scale should be
raised a half step in Renaissance polyphony, what tempo
to play, and when and how much to deviate from the
strictly metronomic tempos.
Although CMN is a remarkably adaptable system, it
is largely optimized for performance. It is therefore insufﬁcient by itself for music analysis. It doesn’t show us
harmonic analysis, motivic relations, musical form, etc.
To illustrate this with a single example, consider the problem of depicting musical time. Though music is generally
assumed to have a preferred tempo and note values seem
to be deﬁned in a strictly hierarchical manner in which elements at one level are grouped into twos or threes at the
next level. In practice, however, most music is anything
but regular.
Figure 1 shows a score reduction of the ﬁrst 24 measures of Beethoven’s ﬁfth symphony. Each measure consists of two beats which, in the absence of other factors,
would be expected to be roughly the same length. Figure 2 shows the timing in a recording of this passage with
Pierre Monteux conducting the London Symphony. Each
block represents one measure of notated music. (The timing points were set by manually clicking a button on each
downbeat and then carefully checking the placement and
adjusting as needed.) Of course, the fermatas in the measures shown in darker gray would be expected to be longer
than the others, but note that the measures preceding these
are also longer than those in the fourteen measures in the
middle that are uninterrupted by fermatas.
An MIR system needs to decide whether to focus on
the “musical” time as notated in the score or on the real
time reﬂected in the performance. In the case real-time
information is desired, then another type of visualization
might be more appropriate. Similar decisions relating to
the representation of pitch, timbre, and other musical features must be made.

Figure 3: Spectrogram of a recorded excerpt of W.A. Mozart, Requiem K. 626, “Confutatis,” as performed by the chorus
and orchestra of the Gulbenkian Foundation of Lisbon, Michael Corboz, Conductor. (Cogan, 1984)

3 SEEING SOUND
The value we place on the musical score notwithstanding,
we experience music primarily through sound, usually in
the form of an intricate combination of complex waveforms representing (potentially) dozens or even hundreds
of different sound sources. An acoustic signal can be represented visually with a spectrogram, which graphs time
(x) vs. pitch frequency (often on a logarithmic scale on
the y axis). Cogan (1984) devotes a book to the analysis
of a wide range of pieces based on spectrograms taken of
performances of them. Figure 3, taken from that book,
represents a section from Mozart’s Requiem. Numbered
bands along the y-axis represent octave regions. The image depicts clearly the dramatic musical contrast between
Confutatis maledictis, ﬂammis acribus addictis (“When
the accursed have been confounded And given over to
the bitter ﬂames,” sung by male voices and accompanied
by brass and low strings) and Voca me cum benedictis
(“Call me with the blessed,” sung by female voices). Cogan observes that the high partials present in the Confutatis sections are due in part to the frequently occurring
high-pitched [i] vowel. The spectrogram is particularly
useful for conveying the broad sonorous contrasts created by changes in orchestration, in musical texture, and
dynamics–more so than traditional notation.
Although music in audio form is comparatively ubiquitous and, for computer-based applications, is easier to
obtain than music in symbolic form, it has many limitations as a representation for analysis. Humans have the
(remarkable) ability to recognize individual components
in a sound source, including identifying speciﬁc instruments, or instrument families, as well as melodic lines and
rhythmic patterns within each, and to translate that information into a mental symbolic form that is more reminiscent of the musical score than of a spectrogram. As those
carrying out research in polyphonic transcription know, it
is exceedingly difﬁcult to extract this information from an
audio signal, and hardly more visible in a picture of that
signal. In fact, except when spectral (i.e., timbral) information is speciﬁcally the focus, the visual “noise” that the
overtone structures add to the image masks much of the
information that is traditionally of interest in music anal-

Figure 4: Brinkman and Mesiti (1991) graphic rendition
of score of Schoenberg, Drei Klavierst¨ cke, Op. 11, No.
u
1, measures 1-11. Annotations added.

ysis.

4 SPECTROGRAM ANALOGS
It is possible to derive some of the same beneﬁts of the
musical spectrogram, but without the messiness of the
timbral information using symbolic data, which can easily
depict just fundamental pitches. Figure 4 is a “part plot”
(Brinkman and Mesiti, 1991) of the ﬁrst eleven measures
of Schoenberg’s Piano Piece, Op. 11, No. 1. As in the
spectrogram, time proceeds left to right, though now by
notated time, not in real performance time, while notated
pitch follows the y axis as in a spectrogram. Pitches that
belong to the same musical voice and are not interrupted
by rests are connected with vertical lines, so that melodic
gestures can be readily seen. The format makes it easy
to see recurrences of the same motive (A) or a variation
of the opening melodic gesture (B), as well as where the
moving melodic lines occur in relation to the sustained
accompanying chords.
This type of visualization has a number of potential
beneﬁts relative to standard notation. In a chamber or orchestral score, for instance, it ﬂattens the contents of the
various staves into a single coordinate system. (A symphonic score can easily include 15 staves or more.) It also
eliminates the visual clutter of staves, barlines, as well as
note heads and associated stems, ﬂags, and beams, allowing one to focus on basic melodic shape. The tradeoff
is that speciﬁc pitch and rhythmic/metric information is
missing, as is the timbral information present in a spectrogram.

391

Figure 5: Video excerpt from Music Animation Machine
(Malinowski, 2005) realization of J. S. Bach, “In dulci jubilo” from Das Orgelb¨ chlein. V-shaped line added.
u

A related type of notation is used in several animations produced by Malinowski (2005). In Figure 5, time
and pitch are plotted on the same axes as in Brinkman
and Mesitis graphic, with two differences: pitches are not
connected with vertical lines to show larger gestures, and
the input is a MIDI ﬁle, which means the graph is based
on performance data rather than notated durations. (Of
course Brinkman and Mesiti’s graphs could also use performance timing, and Malinowski’s MIDI ﬁles could be
generated with strictly quantized data, so this distinction
is not particularly meaningful.)
Malinowski uses color effectively to represent different parts of the four-part musical texture: the chorale
melody being played in the ﬁrst and third parts are in
darker colors. I have added lines to show how the lower
part imitates the upper in this excerpt. The faster-moving
accompanying parts are depicted with a lighter color.
(White is used for the currently sounded notes.)
This type of line graph can be generalized to show features other than pitch on the y axis. Another graph by
Brinkman and Mesiti (Figure 6) shows, for instance, the
dynamic levels notated in the score of the ﬁrst 24 measures of Bart´ k’s fourth string quartet, ﬁrst for each of the
o
four parts, and then in composite. When only a solid line
is shown, it indicates that the instrument is not playing
at that time. Those familiar with the opening of Bart´ k’s
o
quartet will recognize the characteristic dynamic contour
of the movements opening gestures, as well as the loudthen-soft contour of the passage as a whole.

5 MUSICAL FORM AND TONALITY
It is common to represent musical form in a graphical format. The purpose of a form diagram is to show the recurrence of previous themes and the introduction of new
ones. Relatively simple music can be diagrammed quite
minimally. For instance, a large number of American pop-

392

Figure 6: Brinkman and Mesiti (1991) plot of Bart´ k’s
o
String Quartet no. 4, mvt. 1, measures 1-24, mapping
time (x) vs. notated dynamic level (y).

Figure 8: Wattenberg (2005) diagram showing repeated
musical fragments in an unspeciﬁed Mazurka in F# minor
by Chopin.

ular songs (“Autumn Leaves,” “Over the Rainbow”) is in
the form aaba or a close variant.
Ultimately, the complexity of a formal diagram is
based on the complexity of the music and the desired level
of granularity. Figure 7, for instance, shows a diagram of
a typical minuet and trio movement from a piano sonata.
Thematic similarities are depicted with both similar text
labels and similar colors. The large ABA structure depicts
the overall arrangement, minuet, trio, and shortened minuet repeat. Internal bubbles reveal the essential bipartite
division of each of those sections, while the ||: a :||: b a :||
structure of the A and B sections are apparent at the lowest
level. Derived from a recorded performance, the sections
in this diagram are shown proportional to real, not musical
time. (Numbers below the diagram are measure numbers.)
Figure 8 represents musical recurrence in a rather different way. Designed by digital artist Martin Wattenberg,
the diagram uses arches to connect repetitions of musical material. Whereas Figure 7 shows thematic repeti-

Figure 7: Formal diagram of Beethoven, Piano Sonata, Op 2, No. 1, Mvt. 3, produced using Variations2 timeline tool (
http://variations2.music.indiana.edu/). Sectional proportions based on performance by Richard Goode.

Figure 9: Craig Sapp’s Tonal Landscape (type 1 plot)
of J. S. Bach, Well-Tempered Clavier, Book 1, Prelude
in C-sharp minor. From http://ccrma.stanford.
edu/∼craig/keyscape/.

tions only at the sectional level, this one connects repeated
events wherever they ﬁrst occur. The thicker the band, the
more extensive the material that is repeated. For example, two large immediately repeated sections are apparent in the ﬁrst quarter and the central half of the example,
whereas a number of short elements from the end of that
ﬁrst repetition recur at the end of the piece (see the series of tall, thin arches spanning most of the length of the
ﬁgure).
Though the diagram is visually appealing (even more
so in the translucent pastel blues in the color version), it
fails as an effective depiction of musical design in several
respects. First, if the ﬁrst section is repeated (as suggested
by the ﬁrst solid grey arch), then why do the materials at
the end of the piece refer to the repetition and not to their
ﬁrst instance? This leads to a strangely non-hierarchical
view of the piece that is surely at odds with its structure
(compare the orderliness of the previous Beethoven example). Also, because the height of an arch is related only to
the distance of the events it connects, it gives a sense of
importance to repetitions that are far apart in the music
that may or may not be justiﬁed musically. An MIR system that contains (or automatically generates) form diagrams of musical pieces should support the formal model,
not the latter.
A different type of musical structure is depicted in a
“tonal landscape” by Sapp (2001). Figure 9 depicts the
tonal structure of the C-sharp minor prelude from Bach’s
Well-Tempered Clavier, Book 1. Again, time proceeds
along the x axis, but in this case, as one moves downward

Figure 10: Craig Sapp’s Tonal Landscape (type 2
plot) of Mozart’s Viennese Sonatina No. 1 in C,
Mvt. 1. From http://ccrma.stanford.edu/
∼craig/keyscape.

from the top of the ﬁgure, each row divides the piece into
n + 1 segments of equal length (the ﬁrst row 1, the second
2, and so on). Each segment is then assigned a color based
on an estimate of the overall key that is characteristic for
that segment. By the bottom of the graph, key estimate
are being made for very short segments of music. The estimated keys are displayed using a color scheme that maps
each note around the circle of ﬁfths to adjacent colors in
the rainbow (E = red . . . C = green . . . A = violet).
A second type of graph (Figure 10) also depicts increasingly local key estimates as one moves from top to
bottom. Rather than using n + l discrete segments for
layer l, the ﬁgure uses a continually sliding window that
grows smaller as it moves toward the musical surface at
the bottom. This ﬁgure has been further modiﬁed by the
application logarithmic scaling that squashes the top of
the image, allowing the features near the bottom to extend
more visibly toward the upper part of the image.
Sapp’s plots are intriguing in that they depict the oc-

393

casional ambiguity of tonal orientation experienced as one
listens to a piece. Several details of his approach are problematic, however. One is that it is highly doubtful that
we perceive tonality on as many levels as suggested by
the diagrams. More critically, the perception of tonality is
bound up closely with the perception of form. In particular, phrases usually begin and end stably in a key. Only
certain kinds of musical events trigger ambiguity of key
center, and this ambiguity exists with nowhere near the
frequency implied by the diagrams. Third, though the images supposedly convey a sense of key distance, the use
of colors to characterize this distance is of little help visually, for we do not generally conceive of colors as being a
certain distance from each other.

6 OTHER MUSIC STRUCTURE VIEWS
A ﬁnal pair of analytical approaches relies on music notation, albeit in untraditional ways. These approaches
require a considerably more sophisticated conception of
musical syntax to understand properly.
The theories of Heinrich Schenker (1969) are among
the most commonly used in the analysis of tonal music.
Schenker posits a hierarchical view of music that resembles the construction of buildings: upon a basic foundation common to all music is built an inner framework, to
which is added wall and ﬂoor members, then paint and
carpeting, and ﬁnally the furnishings. (This oversimpliﬁcation will sufﬁce for present purposes.) Figure 11 depicts
one layer of Schenker’s analysis of a chorale by Bach.
As is characteristic of Schenker’s analyses, emphasis is
given to the counterpoint between the outermost voices of
the music. In the layer shown in the ﬁgure, many of the
decorative pitches from the musical surface (passing and
neighboring tones, for instance), along with the inner parts
(alto and tenor) have been removed. Pitches that belong
to deeper structural levels are shown with open noteheads
and beamed together. Stemless noteheads are least signiﬁcant structurally and are generally considered decorative at this level. Schenker’s complete analysis includes
two further stages of reduction, plus one version that is
more elaborated than the one shown here. The last stage
of reduction shows only the notes in open noteheads here–
the foundation of the piece. The more elaborated version
simply resembles the actual score, but with the structural
pitches from this layer shown.
The ﬁnal analytical approach to be discussed is that
proposed by Lerdahl and Jackendoff (1981). Based on
theories of generative linguistics, Lerdahl and Jakendoff
use various means to describe metrical organization in a
piece, as well as grouping and prolongation structures.
Each of these is depicted in Figure 12. Dots directly below the music are used to show relative metrical strength
of each beat. Brackets below that depict a hierarchy of
groupings of musical events. The tree diagram above the
score depicts either prolongations from one structure to
the same or a related structure, or progressions from one
structure to a different one, and these are further characterized as tensing or relaxing. The events linked to the
highest-level branches are considered the most important
structurally in the passage. Each symbol is determined

394

by well-formedness and preference rules, derived in spirit
from generative linguistics.
The theories both of Schenker and of Lerdahl and
Jackendoff are highly sophisticated and, because they rely
on artistic interpretations on the part of the analyst, their
application in explaining musical works seem yet to be
beyond the capabilities of automated retrieval systems.

7 CONCLUSIONS
Many of the visualization techniques described here can
reveal interesting, musically relevant, and at times highly
sophisticated information about a musical work, information that would be hard to depict in another way. The questions that led to these visualization techniques have been
posed by music analysts who think deeply about musical structure and musical meaning. They represent only
a small sampling of the rich literature that awaits discovery by those in the MIR community who might wish to
address similar questions.

REFERENCES
A. Brinkman and M. Mesiti. Graphic modeling of musical
structure. Computers in Music Research, 3:1–42, 1991.
R. Cogan. New Images of Musical Sound. Harvard University Press, Cambridge, Mass., 1984.
R. S. Hatten. Metaphor in music. In E. Tarasti, editor,
Musical Signiﬁcation: Essays in the Semiotic Theory
and Analysis of Music, number 121 in Approaches to
Semiotics, pages 373–391. Mouton de Gruyter, Berlin,
1995.
F. Lerdahl and R. Jackendoff. A Generative Theory of
Tonal Music. MIT Press, Cambridge, Mass., 1981.
S. Malinowski.
Music animation machine, 2005.
URL http://www.well.com/user/smalin/
mam.html.
C. Sapp. Harmonic visualizations of tonal music. In Proceedings, pages 423–430, Havana, Cuba, 2001. International Computer Music Conference.
H. Schenker. Five Graphical Music Analyses. Dover Publications, New York, 1969.
M. Wattenberg. The shape of song, 2005. URL http:
//turbulence.org/Works/song/.
L. Zbikowski. Conceptualizing Music. Oxford University
Press, New York, 2002.

Figure 11: Third (foreground) layer from Heinrich Schenker’s analysis of J. S. Bach’s setting of “Ich bin’s, ich sollte
b¨ ssen.” (Schenker, 1969).
u

Figure 12: Excerpt from Lerdahl and Jackendoff’s diagram of Mozart, Symphony No. 40 in G minor, measures 1-22.
(Lerdahl and Jackendoff (1981), p. 259).

395

