USING 3D VISUALIZATIONS TO EXPLORE AND DISCOVER MUSIC
Paul Lamere
Sun Labs
Sun Microsystems
Burlington, MA, USA
Paul.Lamere@sun.com

Douglas Eck
Sun Labs
Sun Microsystems
Burlington, MA, USA
Douglas.Eck@umontreal.ca

ABSTRACT
This paper presents Search Inside the Music an application
for exploring and discovering new music. Search Inside
the Music uses a music similarity model and 3D visualizations to provide a user with new tools for exploring and
interacting with a music collection. With Search Inside
the Music, a music listener can ﬁnd new music, generate
interesting playlists, and interact with their music collection.
1 INTRODUCTION
Figure 1. 3D View of the Music Space
Tools that help listeners ﬁnd new music, re-ﬁnd forgotten
music, and create coherent playlists become increasingly
important as music collections grow in size. At the same
time, it is important to remember that the primary purpose
of music is entertainment. As such, activities surrounding music such as music discovery and playlist generation
should be engaging and entertaining activities.
In this paper we describe the Search Inside the Music application. SITM uses interactive 3D visualizations
of a music similarity space to allow a music listener to
explore their music collection, to receive recommendations for new music, to generate interesting and coherent playlists, and to interact with the album artwork of a
music collection. The resulting user interface is arguably
more engaging and enjoyable to use than currently available commercial music interfaces.
2 MUSIC SIMILARITY
The visualizations in the Search Inside the Music system
rely on a music similarity model. The system is decoupled
from the similarity model such that any music similarity
model that can quickly determine the distance between
any two songs in a music collection can be used. We’ve
successfully used models based on the Marysyas system
[3] as well as models developed here at Sun Microsystems
[4]. Experience has shown that similarity models based
upon maximum-margin classiﬁers such a support vector
machines generate poor visualizations since these classic 2007 Austrian Computer Society (OCG).

ﬁers tend to result in a number of tight clusters that are not
well-suited for exploration and visualization.
3 VISUALIZATIONS
Having a model of the musical similarity space allows
us to represent a music collection in new and interesting ways. Figure 1 shows a 3-dimensional visualization
of the music space. In this visualization songs are represented by spheres ﬂoating in space. Spheres that are close
together in this space represent songs that are musically
similar. The current playlist is shown by a connected sequence of ﬂoating album covers. Larger spheres represent
songs that are favored by the listener. The music listener
can interact with this visualization to explore the music
space. Clicking on a sphere will cause the represented
song to play. Clicking on the ‘More like this’ button will
add more songs to the visualization that sound similar to
the current song. The listener can generate interesting and
varied playlists by selecting two end point songs and having the browser generate a path through the music collection that best connects the songs, minimizing jarring song
transitions. Interacting in this way with the music collection can provide interesting insights into its contents and
composition and provides an arguably more enjoyable interaction than is typically found in a more traditional music browser that relies primarily on lists of song titles and
artist names.
SITM uses a multi-dimensional scaling technique to
project the high-dimensional music space into three di-

Figure 4. The Album Spiral
Figure 2. The Album Cloud

Figure 3. The Album Grid

lection or focus in on particular neighborhoods within the
collection. A listener can click on any album in the grid
to audition songs on the album. As with the album cloud,
the album artwork in the album grid is represented using
a real-world physics model, allowing for smooth, realistic
motion of the album artwork. The album grid is not constrained to be a planar grid. It can be shaped into rings,
boxes, ellipses and various other shapes. Figure 4 shows
the album grid in the form of a spiral. The album artwork
reshapes itself into the various forms following smooth
trajectories generated by the physics model. These animations present a highly engaging experience for a music
listener interacting with their music collection.
4 CONCLUSION

mensions similar to the approaches used in [2] with optimizations described in [1].
3.1 Album Cloud

In this paper we describe the visualizations used in the
Search Inside the Music project. SITM uses 3D visualizations to allow a music listener to explore and interact with
their music collection, to help them to generate interesting
playlists and to discover new music. The user interface
provides a dynamic environment that is engaging and fun
to use, helping to make the task of music exploration and
discovery be more entertaining.

Album artwork has always been an important part of music collecting. However, with the shift to digital music,
opportunities to interact with the album artwork have diminished. In SITM, we hope to bring back some of the
opportunities to enjoy the artwork associated with a record
album. Figure 2 shows the SITM album cloud. When a
song is playing, SITM displays the artwork for the current album, surrounded by the artwork for albums that
have similar sounding songs. With the album cloud, a
music listener can quickly see a set of albums containing
similar music, enhancing the opportunities for serendipitous music discovery. SITM uses a real-world physics
model to manage the motion of the album artwork, yielding smooth, realistic album artwork transitions.

[1] Matthew Chalmers. A linear iteration time layout algorithm for visualising high-dimensional data. Visualization ’96 Proceedings, 1996.

3.2 Album Grid

[2] John C. Platt. Fast embedding of sparse music similarity graphs.

SITM provides tools for exploring a music collection. One
such tool is the album grid shown in Figure 3. The album
grid shows the artwork for all of the albums in a music collection. The album artwork is arranged in a grid such that
musically similar albums appear adjacent to each other,
while musically dissimilar albums appear far apart. At a
glance, a music listener can view their entire music col-

Acknowledgments
Album artwork images used courtesy of Magnatune.com
5 REFERENCES

[3] G. Tzanetakis and P. Cook. Marsyas: A framework for
audio analysis, 2000.
[4] Kris West and Paul Lamere. A model-based approach
to constructing music similarity functions. EURASIP
Journal on Advances in Signal Processing, 2007.

