GLOBE OF MUSIC - MUSIC LIBRARY VISUALIZATION USING
GEOSOM
Stefan Leitich, Martin Topf
University of Vienna
Department of Distributed and Multimedia Systems
Liebiggasse 4/3-4, 1010 Vienna, AT
ABSTRACT
Music collections are commonly represented as plain textual lists of artist, title, album etc. for each contained music track. The large volume of personal music libraries
makes them difﬁcult to browse and access for users. In
respect to possible information visualization techniques,
no established convenient user interfaces exist. By using
a spherical self-organizing map algorithm on low level audio features and processing the resulting map data, a Geographic Information System is used to visualize a music
collection. This results in an aspiring music library visualization, which can be handled intuitively by the user
and even provides new possibilities for accessing a music
collection in the digital domain.
1 INTRODUCTION
The advent of digital media libraries has deﬁnitely passed.
Nearly every media consumer is in possession of a digital library of media documents nowadays. This of course
includes private music collections. In previous days, one
browsed through her own music collection by picking CDs
from shelves, rearranging stacks and heaps, while searching for the desired track. This was on the one hand an
annoying task, but on the other hand somehow part of the
listening experience. After having handled a CD a few
hundred times, while searching for another one, the artwork as visual experience becomes strongly connected to
the tracks the CD contains.
In the digital domain the dominant interface for browsing a personal media library was, and partly still is, a
search task in a long list of plain textual information.
Those lists contain known metadata of a song like artist, title, album, etc. In commercially available media playback
applications, the textual playlist is still the most prominent kind of library representation that the user has to deal
with. One exception is Apple iTunes with its “cover ﬂow
view”. In this visualization, the user has the possibility
of browsing through the tracks of her media library, while
the artwork is presented in a neatly animated horizontal
lineup, with the selected song’s artwork in the center.
c 2007 Austrian Computer Society (OCG).

The coinciding popularity of Geographic Information
Systems (GIS), for example Google Earth or NASA
WorldWind 1 , means that users are familiar with the interactions possible in such a system. One can easily navigate by rotating, tilting and zooming to access the desired
view.
Our approach, Globe of Music, makes use of a spherical self-organizing map (SOM) algorithm, to arrange the
items of a digital music library on a sphere in context of a
GIS.
2 RELATED WORK
An early publication in the research domain of Music Information Retrieval (MIR) by Tzanetakis, tackled not only
feature extraction aspects for audio and related classiﬁcation methods, but also possible visualization techniques
in this domain [9]. He proposed these techniques as interaction methods to enhance audio editors supported by
automatic feature extraction, but also browsers for audio
collections to visualize timbre or genre information of audio in a 2D and 3D manner.
Similar in structure to this approach is the work by
Pampalk [7], who developed a psychoacoustically motivated approach for feature extraction and combined it with
a visualization technique using a landscape metaphor the so-called Islands of Music. This approach was further developed by Pampalk himself, using aligned SOMs
to support multiple, user-adjustable views of a music collection [5], still using the landscape metaphor. Knees et
al. [2] interpreted the height proﬁle of the landscape metaphor to create a 3D representation of the Islands of Music.
Additionally, they introduced an anisotropic auralization
in this approach, by rendering a 5.1 surround sound model
and augmenting the environment by related images and
terms retrieved from the web in this user interface.
Contrasting visualization techniques are presented in
the work by Torrens et al. [8]. Here, 2D visualizations in
the form of a disc, a rectangle, and a tree-map are presented, using criterias like genre, artist, year of creation,
and a deﬁnable quantitative criterion such as playcount.
Goto proposes in [1] an user interface - Musicream combining the query-by-example and browsing paradigm.
1

http://worldwind.arc.nasa.gov

Music tracks are visualized as music-discs and described
by feature vectors. The so-called “streaming function”
creates a steady ﬂow of music-discs over the screen. If
the user picks one of these discs and approaches another
disc with it, similar music-discs, in terms of feature vector
distance, will stick together and form a playlist. Another
approach is the joined work by Goto and Pampalk [6]
called MusicRainbow. This approach exploits a combination of signal based information (spectral similarity and
ﬂuctuation patterns) and information from the web. Visually, this depicts a “circular rainbow” with similar artists
placed next to each other using a one-dimensional circular
SOM. High-level terms (e.g.“rock”) on the inside and on
the outside music-related terms (e.g. instruments, style attributes, etc.) are used for labeling. Colored rings encode
different styles of music, and are sorted by the size of the
styles part within the collection. A turning knob is used as
an input device to browse the music collection.
Our approach is motivated by the landscape metaphor,
but augments this with a spherical representation using a
spherical SOM - Globe of Music. The spherical SOM intrinsically abolishes the border effect of a SOM, and the
sphere or globe serves as the user interface metaphor of
intuitive perception. A more detailed description is given
in the next section.

3 APPROACH
Our approach is composed of three steps: (1) extracting
signal-based features from audio, (2) using the GeoSOM
algorithm [11] to arrange music tracks according to feature vectors, and ﬁnally (3) transforming this information
into a GIS renderable format, which depicts the user interface.

3.1 Feature Extraction
The features used to describe the music pieces, are the
Statistical Spectrum Descriptor (SSD) evaluated by Lidy
in [4]. According to Lidy they showed reasonable performance for classiﬁcation by similarity tasks in relation to
feature vector dimension.
The SSD is composed of seven statistical moments
(mean, median, variance, skewness, kurtosis, min- and
max-value) for the 24 critical bands. The descriptor captures the frequency characteristics in terms of statistical
information about the audio signal, resulting in a feature
vector of 168 elements.
The collection used for initial user experiments (cf.
Section 4) is the training part of the ISMIR Genre Classiﬁcation Collection of the ISMIR 2004 contest, provided by
Magnatune 2 . The collection used, consists of 728 tracks
of different styles: classical (319), electronic (115), jazz/blues (26), metal/punk (45), rock/pop (101), world (122).
2

http://www.magnatune.com

Figure 1. Icosahedron with tessellation frequency 1 to
4 [11].
3.2 GeoSOM
Neural networks, especially the self-organizing map proposed by Kohonen [3], are popular tools for information
organization in visualization techniques used in MIR. In
our approach we apply a spherical SOM, namely the GeoSOM proposed by Wu et al. in [11, 10], which provides,
through a 2D data structure, a space- and time-efﬁcient
approach for neighborhood searching. For a detailed comparison of different spherical SOM implementations, refer
to [11].
The GeoSOM is suited for the spherical representation
through the use of a tesselated icosahedron (see Fig. 1) instead of a rectangular or hexagonal lattice of a basic SOM.
Furthermore it reduces data distortion due to the removal
of boundaries.
A short overview of this algorithm and its data structure
is given in the following part of this paper. For a detailed
description we refer to [11].
An icosahedron-based geodesic dome is, among the
ﬁve platonic polyhedra, the most similar one to a sphere.
With the exception of the original 12 vertices (5 neighbors), all vertices have 6 immediate neighbors. Depending
on the desired number of neurons N (N = f 2 ∗ 10 + 2),
the icosahedron can be tessellated to increase its dome’s
frequency f .
Cutting the dome open and tilting in a way to retrieve
an orthogonally aligned 2D grid, results in Fig. 2. The
pole’s (A, C) vertices are repeated 4 times (e.g. A, A’,
... , A””) and vertices along the cut edges are duplicated
once (e.g. E, E’). Be aware that there are also connections
along one diagonal between two points (see enlargement
of point E in Fig. 2). This must be considered when calculating the distance between two points in the 2D grid, and
when searching and updating the neighborhood.
For storing the 2D matrix we used two onedimensional arrays, called u array and v array as proposed in Wu et. al [11]. Vertices of a certain u coordinate
are stored in a v array (ordered according to their v coordinates) and those v arrays themselves are contained in
the u array. The duplicated points can be found by starting from the marked points in Fig. 2 and proceeding in the
indicated directions. Boundaries starting at points P and
Q are duplicated as P’ and Q’ at the other end of the data
structure.
The training process of the GeoSOM is similar to the
training of a SOM, considering the different data structure
regarding the tesselated icosahedron. After the training

Figure 2. The 2D data structure for icosahedron-based
geodesic domes [11].

Figure 3. Total view of Globe of Music.
process the GeoSOM data structure is mapped onto the
sphere. The data structure is traversed in diagonals from
the lower left to the upper right and coordinates are calculated.
3.3 Geographic Information System
We made use of the NASA World Wind (Ver. 1.4) GIS, an
open source project developed at NASA Ames Research
Center. It allows users to explore the earth via satellite imagery (e.g. LandSat dataset), elevation data, and meteorologic data, also to retrieve views of other planets. World
Wind offers the possibility of extending its functionality via a plugin mechanism and the deﬁnition of custom
“worlds”. For an extensive description of NASA World
Wind we recommend the project’s website 3 .
In order to deﬁne a custom globe like the Globe of Music, an XML ﬁle deﬁning the most basic attributes of a
world - for example name, equatorial radius and server
3

http://worldwind.arc.nasa.gov

connection information, if the world contains remotely
stored terrain data - has to be created
Fig. 3 shows a screenshot of the Globe of Music visualization in World Wind.
Information displayed on a globe in World Wind is arranged in layers above the basic terrain data. Layers make
it possible to place, icons on certain longitude/latitude coordinates with a deﬁned height above surface, including
name, texture, dimension, and a link, to be followed when
clicking the related icon. These are the most important
attributes used in our implementation, the possibilities for
visualizing information on a layer are manifold.
In a layer deﬁnition the data deﬁned in boundaries and
placename ﬁles can also be imported by referencing the
boundary and placename data, and deﬁning visualization
parameters such as the range of viewers altitude for visibility, distance above surface, font, etc.
The layer we have created contains a background image and icons for every music track placed on the Globe
of Music. Icons are textured with the artwork and linked
to the corresponding music ﬁle (see Fig. 3). Pointing to an
icon with the mouse cursor displays the track’s artist and
title information.
Coordinates of the icons are determined by the neuron
(sector) of the GeoSOM the music track belongs to. If
there is more than one track placed on a neuron, tracks are
stringed in this sector next to each other on the globe.
Boundaries (e.g. a country’s border) and placenames
(e.g. a country’s name) are represented in World Wind via
binary ﬁle formats. With the Globe of Music, these formats are used to (1) outline sectors on the globe related
to a GeoSOM neuron, and (2) to deﬁne placenames, in
our case artist name and track title, for the coordinates at
which icons are placed. This allows a visualization of the
sectors that the globe is divided into, and the usage of the
built-in place ﬁnder tool to query for and locate individual
tracks by text search.
4 INITIAL USER EXPERIMENTS
In the setting of the initial user experiments, users were
presented the Globe of Music visualization and were given
a description and mission in the form of: (1) This visualization depicts a music collection. (2) Music tracks are
arranged on the globe, represented by icons of related artwork. (3) Minor interaction explanations were given if required (rotate, zoom, tilt, click for playback). (4) The music collection contains music tracks presumably unknown
to the user. (5) Browse through and explore this collection
and try to determine its composition.
Test-users were allowed to browse for approximately
15-20 min., followed by a survey about their experience.
The composition of the group of test-users was in terms of
gender 2 to 1 (male to female). The group’s size was 12
people, with an average age of 27.25 (σ ≈ 5.88).
A survey was conducted on the basis of a questionnaire
and a semi-structured interview, by asking questions about
the composition of the music collection involved, organi-

zation of the music title’s placement, experiences of orientation in the visualization, and letting the test-users comment freely.
The test candidates were asked to guess the size of the
music collection presented, and to enumerate the varieties
of music genres, as well as the size of a genre’s collection
part found while browsing. The intention was to ﬁgure out
how well an unknown music collection can be explored.
The genres contained in the collection could be clearly determined, 10 out of 12 persons found all of them. Classical
music was correctly determined as the dominant genre of
the collection.
Users were asked about their impression of the organization of songs on the globe. They were not given any
information a priori, neither did the visualization include
any information about organization of the placement. The
only way to determine the organization was by listening to
the music tracks. Again, 10 out of 12 persons were convinced there is a systematical approach in the placement of
tracks. Common agreement was present about the neighborhood placement of similarly perceived songs, but speculations varied from longitudinal or latitudinal mapped
parameters for placement.
The determination of orientation in the Globe of Music
was done by asking the test-users to locate a music title
they recalled whilst browsing. This task was performed
very well and proved the importance of visual association
between music listened to and its artwork. The greater
part of the test group stated it was easy to ﬁnd a certain
track by remembering the related artwork.
In common comments, users reported a problem with
navigation, because of the globe’s axis. This circumvents
the free rotation around all axes and makes navigation
difﬁcult near the poles. Overall, users were very interested in using such a visualization and asked for common
playback application features such as managing playlists,
adding new songs to the collection, and information about
the actual music title playing.
5 CONCLUSION
In this paper we presented a novel approach for visualizing music collections using a GIS metaphor. It was conducted by feeding a spherical SOM (GeoSOM) with signal based feature vectors for music track description, and
visualizing the resulting spatial distribution on a globe in
NASA World Wind. Inital user experiments with our prototype showed promising results in terms of high user acceptance. This visualization provides the user with an intuitive interface which is easy to handle and fun to explore. The ideas and feature requests collected during experiments encourage further development.
6 ACKNOLEDGEMENTS
We would like to thank the students Robert Neuner, Andreas Seidler, and Michael M¨ ller supporting our work
u

with their investigations regarding data formats and extending NASA World Wind.
7 REFERENCES
[1] M. Goto and T. Goto. Musicream: New music playback interface for streaming, sticking, sorting, and recalling musical pieces. In Proceedings of the 6th International Conference on Music Information Retrieval,
pages 404–411, London, UK, 11-15 September 2005.
[2] P. Knees, M. Schedl, T. Pohle, and G. Widmer. An
innovative three-dimensional user interface for exploring music collections enriched. In MULTIMEDIA ’06:
Proceedings of the 14th annual ACM international
conference on Multimedia, pages 17–24, New York,
USA, 2006. ACM Press.
[3] T. Kohonen, editor. Self-organizing maps. SpringerVerlag New York, Inc., Secaucus, NJ, USA, 1997.
[4] T. Lidy and A. Rauber. Evaluation of feature extractors and psycho-acoustic transformations for music
genre classiﬁcation. In Proceedings of the 6th International Conference on Music Information Retrieval,
pages 34–41, London, UK, 11-15 September 2005.
[5] E. Pampalk, S. Dixon, and G. Widmer. Exploring music collections by browsing different views. In Proceedings of the 4th International Conference on Music
Information Retrieval (ISMIR’03), Washington, D.C.,
USA, October 2003.
[6] E. Pampalk and M. Goto. Musicrainbow: A new user
interface to discover artists using audio-based similarity and web-based labeling. In 7th International Conference on Music Information Retrieval, pages 367–
370, Victoria, BC, Canada, 8-12 October 2006.
[7] E. Pampalk, A. Rauber, and D. Merkl. Content-based
organization and visualization of music archives. In
MULTIMEDIA ’02: Proceedings of the tenth ACM
international conference on Multimedia, pages 570–
579, New York, USA, 2002. ACM Press.
[8] M. Torrens, P. Hertzog, and J.L. Arcos. Visualizing
and exploring personal music libraries. In 5th International Conference on Music Information Retrieval,
Barcelona, Spain, 10-14 October 2004.
[9] G. Tzanetakis. Manipulation, analysis and retrieval
systems for audio signals. Technical Report TR-65102, Princeton Computer Science, 2002.
[10] Y. Wu and M. Takatsuka. The geodesic self-organizing
map and its error analysis. In ACSC ’05: Proceedings
of the Twenty-eighth Australasian conference on Computer Science, pages 343–351, Darlinghurst, Australia, 2005. Australian Computer Society, Inc.
[11] Y. Wu and. Takatsuka. Spherical self-organizing map
using efﬁcient indexed geodesic data structure. Neural
Networks, 19(6-7):900–910, July-August 2006.

