Yale University Department of Music

Bodily Hearing: Physiological Metaphors and Musical Understanding
Author(s): Andrew Mead
Source: Journal of Music Theory, Vol. 43, No. 1 (Spring, 1999), pp. 1-19
Published by: Duke University Press on behalf of the Yale University Department of Music
Stable URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/3090688
Accessed: 16/12/2009 13:17
Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of JSTOR's Terms and Conditions of Use, available at
http://www.jstor.org/page/info/about/policies/terms.jsp. JSTOR's Terms and Conditions of Use provides, in part, that unless
you have obtained prior permission, you may not download an entire issue of a journal or multiple copies of articles, and you
may use content in the JSTOR archive only for your personal, non-commercial use.
Please contact the publisher regarding any further use of this work. Publisher contact information may be obtained at
http://www.jstor.org/action/showPublisher?publisherCode=duke.
Each copy of any part of a JSTOR transmission must contain the same copyright notice that appears on the screen or printed
page of such transmission.
JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide range of
content in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and facilitate new forms
of scholarship. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.

Duke University Press and Yale University Department of Music are collaborating with JSTOR to digitize,
preserve and extend access to Journal of Music Theory.

http://www.jstor.org

BODILY HEARING:
PHYSIOLOGICAL METAPHORS AND
MUSICAL UNDERSTANDING

Andrew
Mead

I wantto borrowan openinggambitfromSuzanneCusick's"Ona Lesbian Relationshipwith Music: A Serious Effort Not to Think Straight"
(Cusick, 1994), both because it suits my topic well, but more importantly
because her work has served to help me give voice to a centralaspect of
my own engagementwith music, an aspect thathad for many years simply gone withoutsaying.In herpaper,Cusick speaksof a couple of shocks
of recognition(one actuallyof non-recognition)thatcued her to her own
omission of crucial aspects of her identity from her professional work.
Her work in turnhas served me severaltonic jolts, one in particular
that
pertainsto my subject.
I, too, wish to open with a couple of shocks of recognition, as well
as not so much a shock as a chronic state of non-recognitionthat has
plagued my attemptsto sharemy musical experience.The first entails a
brief annecdote. Some years ago I attendeda concert at which my colleague, oboist HarrySargous,played the premiereof a concerto written
for him by a Detroit composer.During the piece, I found myself at one
point in intense pain (not from the music per se, I should add), which
abated when I found myself taking a deep, gasping breath.What had
happened,I realized, was that I had quite unconsciously been breathing
along with the soloist. Harry,however,had been using circularbreathing
1

for a particularpatch, and I had quite literally run out of breath.This
moment was a physical embodimentof somethingthathad been lurking
at the edges of my musical consciousness, the fact that a significantpart
of my engagementwith music, be it as listener or composer,had to do
with a sense of how the music was made-that the sound of the music
was an embodimentof that making, and that hearingthat making in the
of
sound had much to do with my understanding music.
Thatpoint remainedmutefor some time, it strikingme as a truismthat
needn't be mentioned. That it could, that it should, be both mentioned
and explored, emerged in anothershock of recognition, this occurring
during Suzanne Cusick's more recent presentation,"FeministTheory,
Music Theory,and the Mind/Body Problem"(Cusick, 1994a). In working throughissues related to questions of gender tied to the mind/body
duality,she writes,
Music, an art which self-evidentlydoes not exist until bodies make it
and/orreceiveit, is thoughtaboutas if it were a mind-mind
game.Thus
whenwe thinkanalytically
aboutmusic,whatwe ordinarily is describe
do
choices)for the sakeof informing
practicesof the mind(the composer's
the practicesof otherminds.... We end by ignoringthe fact thatthese
withoutthe bodily practicesthey
practicesof the mind are nonpractices
to
call for-about whichit has becomeunthinkable think.
... Metaphorically, have denied the very thing that makes music
we
music, the thing which gives it such enormoussymbolic and sensual
power(16).
Hearing this producedin me a sense of relief and release, a mental
exhalationas it werebalancingthe actualintakeof breaththatfirstbrought
these issues to the forefront for me, and granting me an even greater
is
surceasefrompain. In Cusick's words,music for the performer "something you do;"moreover,
nor
... the scoreis not the workto a performer; is the score-made-sound
the work:the work includes the performer's
mobilizingof previously
studiedskills so as to embody,to makereal, to makesounding,a set of
that are only partlyrelationships
among sounds (Cusick
relationships
1994a, 18).
She follows this with an examplefromone of Bach's choralepreludes,
on "Austiefer Not," showing how Bach's settingplaces the organistfirst
into andthen out of a position of physical imbalance,correlatedwith that
portionof the text that implores God to send the psalmist grace. Taking
the work as "somethingyou do" infuses this passage with meaning for
the performer.
Cusick concentratesher attentionto this kind of knowledge on the
2

but
performer, I would like to extend this awarenessof music as "something you do" to the experienceof the composer and the listeneras well.
Writinga piece of music certainlyentails the marshallingof sounds and
relationshipsto be understoodby the mind, but it can also be deeply engaged with the direction of human action, sometimes, as Cusick demonstrateswith her example from Bach, in very subtleways. How this impinges upon us as listeners, however,is what I shall begin to examine in
the body of what follows. As for the chronic state of non-recognitionI
mentioned at the outset, that not surprisinglyrefers to my fondness for
a body of music that is, by a great many people, considered purely
cerebral,yet for me attainsan enormousexpressive power in large part
throughits implicit physicality.Partof my purposehere will be to suggest this.
*

*

*

Until the advent of recording and electronic transmission,virtually
every musical sound one heardwas the direct productof human action.
Intensity,duration,attack,rhythmicplacement,and so forth,were an immediate index of a player's skill, strengthand dexterity,either directly
embodied in the humanvoice, or mediatedby the otherwise inertmechanism of an instrument.The interpersonalaspect of music making was
highly chargedwith the physical-you were in the same room with the
music makers,and the energy of the soundmade was an immediatemeasure of the energy used by anotherhuman being to make that sound.
There were exceptions, of course-the pipe organ being perhaps the
most obvious-but the exceptions themselves acquiredcertainkinds of
significancefrom theirbeing exceptions.
The fact thatmost music has been made in this way invites us to consider music in light of the physiology of its making. In what follows I
shall outline some of the ways physiology, the study of bodily function,
inhabitshow we talk and thinkaboutmusic, both directlyand metaphorically. We shall examine what a physiological perspectivemight reveal
aboutdifferenttypes of musical spaces andinstrumental
arenasof action.
I will illustratewith a couple of thoughtexperiments,andI shall consider
a couple of questions raised recently by philosopherKendallWaltonin
light of this perspective.By reflectingon the fact that many listeners are
or have been historically themselves makers of music, I shall posit the
notion of kinestheticempathyas a significantcontributor our musical
to
and
understanding, examinea couple of contemporary
compositionsfrom
this point of view. I should note thatmy remarksshouldn'tbe taken as a
critique either of electronic music or of recording and transmission;
rather,I hope they invite a considerationof the perceptualand aesthetic
differencesamong differentkinds of music making.
3

*

*

*

While most theoreticaldiscourse tends to deal with music as sounds,
those soundsarethe resultof humanaction,andthereforecan be usefully
construedin terms of those actions. Our response to music frequently
if
entails such an understanding, only at a subliminallevel, and our language aboutmusic constantlyreflects this. A physiological sensibility is
particularlyevident in the language that musicians use to communicate
with each other in lessons, rehearsals,and in scores themselves. Words
used to describe a variety of musical domains, including pitch, rhythm,
tone qualityand intensity,all invoke in variousways the bodily activities
needed to effect their projection.Our sense as listeners of the resulting
in
soundscan in turnbe characterized termsof ourunderstanding these
of
cues. Let us considerexamples from a few domains.
physiological
We'll first look at intensity.While dynamic markingscan be read as
referringto the sound itself, forte and piano can also be understoodas
drawsa sound
instructionsregarding strengthwith which a performer
the
from his or her voice or instrument.
Similarunderstanding articulation
of
marks can be made: staccato, legato, tenuto, can speak to us as much
about the way we addressan instrumentas about the sounds we should
produce,while our languageis rife with termsthat, althoughsometimes
used to describe sounds themselves, are overtly descriptiveof how we
play:pizzicato, spiccato, martellato,gestopft are only the tip of the iceberg. We as listeners can understandsound qualities in terms of the
actions used to produce them, and dynamic level certainly reflects the
amountof energy being expendedto create a sound. But the situationis
a little morecomplex:we arenot simply respondingto the strengthof the
signal as it reachesour ears. Dynamics arerelative;the soundof offstage
brass playingforte may be a faintersignal than that of an onstage flute
the
playing with less physical intensity,yet we can understand formeras
strongaction heardat a distance,and the latteras gentleraction closer to
hand.A particularly
good example of this can be heardduringthe finale
of Mahler'sSecond Symphony,just before the entranceof the chorus.
Distance need not be our only criterionfor distinguishingamong different qualities of sounds with the same signal strength.We can readily
understand significantdifferenceof effortinherentin a pianissimo high
a
A as sung by a soprano,comparedto the same note at the same dynamic
level producedas a naturalharmonicon the cello, by recognizingthe differences of control and restraintneeded to producethem. This issue apof
plies readily to our understanding familiarrepertoire-any opera fan
will immediatelyrecognize whatI'm talkingabout-but it can also serve
to explain dynamic markings in certain contemporarymusic.1 Milton
Babbitt'suse of dynamicsfrequentlydemandsthat we recognize similar
contours of intensity projectedby instrumentsof wildly divergent ab4

solute dynamic ranges. However,if we are attentiveto the way a sound
then we can readreveals a player'sintensityof addressto an instrument,
the equivalenceof effort in otherwise disparatesignals.
ily comprehend
We understand music as played, as somethingdone.
the
Related issues arise more globally when we consider the different
senses of musical intensity producedby various sizes of ensembles. If
one compares a performanceof Schoenberg's Verkldrte
Nacht in the
version for six solo stringswith one using his laterstringorchesoriginal
tra arrangement, cannothelp but notice that the versions are qualitaone
tively differentdue to the natureof the differentforces. The chamberversion has (at least for me) far greaterintensity, as the instrumental
parts
Because therearefar
body forththe individualityof each instrumentalist.
fewer people involved in the chamberversion, each player'scontribution
must be much more vivid. On the otherhand,the stringorchestraversion
evinces a sense of power, due to the sheer numberof players on a part.
Individualcontributionsseem less intense, but the sum total of their involvement creates a sense of greaterforce and mass.2Once again, I believe, it is the listener's sense of what is entailedin producingthe sounds
factorin making this distinction.
thatis a majorcontributing
*

*

*

Obviously, similar considerations can be addressed to issues of
rhythm,and it is certainlynot hardto see how so much of our sense of
rhythm stems from our different ways of moving to music, whether
marching,dancing or doing repetitivework.3Our terminologycertainly
reflects this: one need only consider the range of familiartempo markings thatreflect speeds and qualitiesof locomotion. I suspect thatfurther
aspects of rhythmalso derivefrom ourphysical motion, however.We are
extremely sensitive to the differences between even and odd groups of
pulses, whetherthey be at the level of the beat, its subdivision,or numbers of bars in a phrase.It strikesme as not unreasonableto reflect that
our sensitivityto this differenceis at least in partderivedfrom our sense
of the differencebetween those cyclic actionsthatinvolve reciprocalmotion, such walking, and those that do not.
Many theoristshave noted the experientialdifferencebetween rhythmic patterns over different timespans, a difference that must be accounted for when we attemptto make theories that employ hierarchical
levels of rhythmfrom the smallest to the largest span.4One can demonstratethis fairly easily, as follows. Startby tapping a steady pulse at a
comfortabletempo (I find 60 beats a minutea good place to start).Halve
the tempo, then halve it again, and then again.As you continuethis way,
at a certainpoint you will find that you can no longer keep trackof the
timespans accuratelyexcept by maintaininga subdivisionpulse in your
5

mind and keeping count. Returnto the original tempo, and now double
it, again and then again.As you continuethis way, you will find that at a
certainpoint you will no longer be able to tap the pulse with a single finger, but must create it by a reciprocalmotion between two fingers.Continuingin this directionwill eventuallylead to a rate thatis perceivedas
pitch, not rhythm.The operationwe have used to change the pulse-rate
has always been the same, either halving or doubling. It is our physiological limitationsthat define the narrowband of rates that allow us to
hear these beats as a steady streamof pulses.
of
While some have adducedour differentqualitativeunderstandings
I
in differenttimespans to differentmodes of memory,5 would
rhythms
like to suggest thatour differingnotions of the measure,the beat, and the
subdivision of the beat may be all correlatedto different interpretive
framingsof the oscillatoryratesof majormuscle groups.Takingthe beat
as determinedby one half of an oscillatory cycle of a major muscle
group, we can see how this dividerhelps us distinguishthe quality of a
subdivisionof such an actionfrom the action itself, or from batchediterations of thataction, despite the fact thatall of these levels might project
proportionally
equivalentpulse patterns.Meter,of course, falls right out
of this, batching as it does complete oscillations, sets of oscillations, or
in the case of triple meters, iterationsof nonreciprocalcyclic motions.
The rangeof differentdurationsthatan oscillatorycycle might fill is limited at both the shortand the long end by our physical selves, and corresponds nicely to the range of tempi that beats have tended to take. This
coordinatesas well with our awarenessthat absolute pulse rates can be
metrically,for certain ranges behaving as either
radically reinterpreted
instances of subdivisions or as actual beats. It is a downrightphysical
a
pleasure to experience an abruptchange of metrical interpretation;
momentI have always found enormouslysatisfyingin this way occurs at
the returnof the Theme duringthe fugue of BenjaminBritten'sPurcell
is
Variations.
Whatmakes this spot particularly
heart-wrenching the fact
that it is not a simple halving of the tempo, but a change with a ratio of
2/3 thatrelates the tempo of the fugue to thatof the Theme.
A suggestive thoughtexperimentthat might help shed some light on
this way of thinking about rhythm is to imagine what 'slow' or 'fast'
music might be under differentfields of gravity.Obviously, our accustomed muscular motions are determinedby earth's gravity; one need
only think of films of people walking on the moon to see that. Imagine,
then, what music conceived of undersuch circumstancesmight be like.
It is no surprisethat Stanley Kubrickopted for Strauss'sBlue Danube
Waltzto underscoreseveral sequences of spaceflightin 2001: A Space
Odyssey. While the rhythmic organization at hypermetricallevels is
duple, the triple meterinvites us to feel each bar as the iterationof a circularmotion, lifting us from the earthbound
stridingor ploddingof a rec6

iprocal oscillatory duple motion.6It should also be no surprisethat so
much New Age "space"music minimizes pulse at all, or enormously
elongates the span between each ictus, as part of what seems to be an
intentionto suggest weightlessness.
*

*

*

Ways we familiarlytalk aboutpitch, too, are to various degrees conditionedby our physiological sense of how they are produced,as well as
the physiology of our perception.What I want to examine for a minute
here is our habitof scaling pitch from low to high. Firstit is worthtaking
a moment to think a little bit about why we even range pitch on a linear
scale. The fact that our linear scale of pitch correlateswith wavelength
factor,but a counterexample
points to the sigcertainlyis a contributing
nificance of the actual physiological mechanism of our perception of
with wavelength,butwhile we can certainly
pitch.Coloris also correlated
that
be awareof the linear arrangement induces the correlation-see any
rainbow-nevertheless, I would warrantthat the linear scaling of hue is
not the most vivid expressionof ourday-to-dayexperienceof colors. Further,althoughI expect some, even manypeople, may have developedsuch
an ability, I suspect that intervallic equivalency in a scale of color, althougheasily defined,is probablynot the most immediateexperienceof
color we tend to have. I confess it is not mine. I don't see red to yellow
as the equivalentof orange to green, for instance, as I do hear C up to F
to
as equivalentto E up to A. The reasonfor this can be attributed the way
All
we perceive colors-an interestingtopic but beyond our purview.7 of
this is by way of alertingus to the fact that even our simple assumption
of linear scaling of pitch needs to accountfor the physiology of hearing:
thatwe recognize octave equivalencywith ease furtherinvites us to treat
our way of thinkingof a linearpitch scale with care.
Given that we can and do scale pitch in a linear way, why characterize it as low to high? Everyday language frequently describes the extremes of the same linearity in terms of size: a bass drum, even struck
softly, might easily get called a 'big' sound, while mice are often said to
utter a 'tiny' squeak. It is certainlyno news that our conventionalterms
of low and high are culturally conditioned. In Java and Bali pitch is
rangedfrom large to small, and ancientGreektheoryuses termsof heaviness and sharpness.8
Certainlyour notationreinforces the metaphorof
low and high by translatingit into the visual domain,but I believe there
Ourmost immeis a physiological reasonthatwe cling to this metaphor.
diate experienceof pitch comes from our voice, andpitch controlderives
from muscle contractionandrelaxation.The shorterthe vocal chords,the
higher the pitch-reproducing the same physical sensation of muscular
contractionexperiencedwhen lifting our arms,objects, or ourselves.
7

Takingthe physical experienceof singing as a locus for our thinking
aboutpitch can give us a provisionalsense of why we seem comfortable
describingthe pitch scale in termsof low and high, but we must remember thateven those termscan be physiologicallycontextualized.We thrill
to a tenor's high A, but the same frequencysung by a sopranocreates a
very differentsense of 'highness.'David Butlercites a particularly
good
demonstration this phenomenon:try hummingyour highest note, then
of
whistling your lowest (Butler 1992). Your sense of their relative height
derived from how they feel in terms of muscle contractioncan reverse
their actualrelationshipin terms of absolutefrequency.9
Both our perceptionof pitch and our productionof pitch allow us to
scale pitch linearly, but these two factors contributedifferently to our
thinkingaboutpitch relations.First,let us consider some familiarterms
aboutscales thatinvoke notions of physical behavior.While talk of scale
steps and skips might be thought of as a visual metaphor,they match
nicely the differenttypes of efforts needed to sing such intervals.Scale
steps representthe least effort of change;they are in thatsense the 'nearest' notes. However,our mechanismsof pitch perceptionallow us rather
easily to privilege notes relatedby octave; in fact, to relate pitch classes
to a point of referencein terms of the overtone system. From this point
of view, 'nearest'or most closely relatednote would not be the scale step.
While the ear acts as a feedback system to singing, the sheer muscular change for an octave is not privilegedover those for, say, a seventhor
a ninth, leading to differentpatternsof nearness for productionversus
perception.Obviously,the two arehighly intertwined-we hearwhat we
sing-but the differenceis suggestive with regardto musical syntax:the
most closely relatednotes are not those that are easiest to get to. We are
fortunatefor this difference. Indeed, one might argue that tonality deof
pends on this difference,thatSchenker's"Chord Nature"is very much
of our nature,our physiology, and that the simplest motions away from
it (voices moving by step) reflect what is physically the easiest thing
for voices to do. It is interestingto imagine what music might be like if
things were different:if our pitch perceptionwere not modular,for instance, or if our vocal productionwere not continuousin pitch.10
I have been addressing almost exclusively very basic relations bebut
tween ourphysical selves andourmusical understanding, it is easy to
into largerissues
see how the connectioncan be extendedmetaphorically
of syntax and form." As an obvious example, the term 'phrase'is often
definedin termsof our physiological limitations-a phraseis frequently
consideredwhat could be sung in a single breath,even when it is partof
a keyboardwork. It may be a cliche to point it out, but the basic method
for teachingtonal harmonicunderstanding throughvoice leading.And
is
in
while this concept becomes abstract a vast varietyof musical contexts,
its derivation,and the derivationof a huge amount of tonal behavior,
8

stems from vocal practice:voice leading is a study of what voices, our
voices, do in certainmusical contexts, and though it is a truismto point
it out, nevertheless it often gets lost in the shuffle. Why a dissonance
resolves down by step in the same voice it occurs in, why such a move is
related to tension and release, can be tracedvery easily to the physical
experience of singing.12
*

*

*

So far I have used the voice to consider how our physical experience
affects how we think aboutpitch, but it is interestingto see how our engagement with different instrumentscan also affect it. Various instruments can create for their players differentsorts of physically imagined
musical spaces. For me, playing the organhas made bass lines inextricably associatedwith motions of the feet. On the otherhand,a theoristwho
is also a harpistreportsthatfor her,foot motions are associatedwith accidentals;when she shifts to keyboards,she must make a conscious adjustment. For some instruments,registralchanges create radicalchanges of
effort. High notes on brass instruments
have acquiredall sorts of special
significance,due to the extra "oomph"and nerve requiredto bring them
off. On some string instruments,both the physical contractionof the
spaces the fingersmust move and the extrastrengthneeded to to connect
with the fingerboardgive the upper register qualities not found lower
down. Change of register on other instruments,however, is sometimes
much morejust a change of position. The keys of a piano are all the same
two sizes, no matterwherethey areon the keyboard,andwhile the weight
of the action varies, it actuallygets slightly lighter and easier to play the
higher one goes.13
Such differencesare most apparent players,but instruments, the
to
by
way sounds are producedon them, and the sorts of motions needed to
move from one soundto another,createdifferentarenasof musical action
thatcan definitelyinformourhearing.Eachinstrument effect produces
in
a differentsense of what work might entail, and these senses become an
essential partof musical experience,for the listeneras well as the player.
While musicians work for ease throughall registersand intervalson an
neverthelessthe qualitativedifferencebetween, for example,
instrument,
a two-octave leap downwardon a horn and the same intervalplayed on
the two outer stringsof a guitarwill be considerable,because of the radically differentdifficultiesof the two acts: the latteris trivial, a flutterof
thehand,while the formercan seem as daringasjumpingoff a cliff. Think,
if you can bring yourself to do so, of the famous horn passage from Til
Eulenspiegelplayed on the piano, or even worse, on the guitar!
Think also what might happen if a given arenafor action were radically changed: musical meaning could change radically as well. That
9

such can and has happenedis broughtto our ears dramaticallywhen we
hear,for example, works writtenfor the naturalhorn actuallyplayed on
a naturalhorn. Mozart'sHorn Concertos,or Schubert'sAuf dem Strom,
not to mentionBrahms'sHornTrio,are strikinglydifferentworks (andto
me much more thrilling)when heardon the naturalhorn.14
Listenerscannothelp but be made awareof these issues from a sensitivity to the qualitiesof the soundsproduced.Soundqualitiesarenot neutral:the soundsof the flute and of the oboe, for example,carrywith them
the implicationsof the airflowdifferencesbetween the two instruments,
and thus to hear each of those instrumentstraversingthe same musical
line invitesthe listenerto construethatline in significantlydifferentways.
Composersare constantlytakingadvantageof this. Elgarin the finale of
his Second Symphony runs a virtuosic lick through a series of instruments, climaxing in the horns. The sense of electricity in the passage is
not so much a result of the change of timbre,but a result of our amazement both thathe would be so daringas to bet the hornsthey could do it,
and thatthey could succeed.
Composing, then, is not only about sound but also about action, and
notation can reflect this. Consider the opening of Beethoven's HammerklavierSonata.The opening gesture takes on its particular
qualities
in a numberof ways, one certainlybeing the fact that the chord on the
down beat fleshes out the second, thirdandfourthpartialsof the up-beat's
low Bb,butanotherbeing thatbothup beat anddownbeat areplayed with
the same hand. Thus, the chord of the down beat is not merely 'these
notes following the precedingnote at such and such a time interval,'but
all that plus 'all these notes played as part of a single gesture,'a single
chord grabbed,as it were, by a giant hand. Now, performersget away
with a certainamountof 'cheating,'and to good end, but I feel it is a disservice to the piece if, when breakingthe gesturebetween two hands,the
performerignores the musical results implicit in the specified physical
action. There are times when the musical import of a piece or passage
derivesfrom its pushingthe limits of physicalfeasibility,andthis can and
shouldbe understood performers listenersalike. Once again,I ask
and
by
to imagine, say, the Ravel or Prokofiev Concertos for Piano, Left
you
Hand, and Orchestra,
played with both hands.
*

*

*

As the foregoing examples might suggest, I believe that a definite
component of what we do as listeners involves our recognition of the
doing in Cusick's 'somethingyou do' thatis the makingof music. I think
of it as a form of kinestheticempathy,an identificationwith the embodiment of a sound. Clearly,one of the visceral thrills of hearing a singer
10

comes from the intimate knowledge of making sounds with our voices
in
thatwe shareas humanbeings. We aretransported partby what it must
be like to make such a sound. Nor need such physical recognition be
quite so immediate.As so many examples attest,we areconstantlytranslating one sort of musical experience into some new arena, and these
translationscan result in empathieswith physical engagements that are
layers deep. I can imagine, for example, that listening to a Chopin Nocturne would engage our kinesthetic response to the player's touch and
dexterity,while furtherengaging ourresponseto the bel canto vocal style
thatthe work emulates,while at still anotherlevel, our appreciation its
of
underlyingabstractvoice-leading would connect with our physical sense
of how voices in part-writing
behave. None of this is meant to supplant
our mind's role in listening to music; I simply want to acknowledgeand
bring consciously into participationone of the ways we bring music to
ourselves, and ourselves to music.
KendallWaltonhas recently broughtup a couple of intriguingmusical issues that mesh with what I have been discussing.15 one, he has
For
observed that of all the temporalarts,music is the only one that readily
induces physical movements:a silent film with regularlypulsing shapes,
for example, does not produce the sort of foot-tappingthat a piece of
music with the same rhythmwould. For the other,he has observed that
for the vast majorityof the time, crescendi are interpreted as sounds
not
of fixed amplitudegrowingcloser,butof soundsin a fixedlocationchanging in intensity.While I don't think that the approachI am using here
offers complete explanations,I think it allows us to take a step towards
these phenomena.If we know sound (as, for the most part,
understanding
we don't know shape) as a translation our own bodily efforts,then it is
of
not hard for us to understanda rhythmin terms of the effort it took to
make it.'6 We speak, sometimes cavalierly,about 'musical gesture,'but
we should never forget thatthere is some reality to the notion that much
music is indeedproducedthroughphysicalgesture.It doesn't seem unreasonable that we might index those physical gestures throughthe music
they produce,andthenimitatethem.'7We wantto feel in partwhatit feels
like to make those sounds. As for the second point, at least two things
come into play. One is our sheer ability to recognize the change of a
sound'sproximitybased on ambience;the otherhas to do with ourrecognitionof dynamicsnot so much as strengthof signal butas index of effort.
a
Thus, it takes additionalmusical cues to make us understand crescendo
as representing change of location.Concerningthis last point, it is intera
esting to note thatin electronicmusic the sense of soundlocation andthe
change thereofbecomes a compositionaldimension.

11

*

*

*

I want to close by suggesting how a physiological viewpoint can inform our thinkingabout largerissues of musical syntax and structure.I
want to use a couple of examples that are drawnfrom music dear to my
cerebral.I menheart, a body of music usually regardedas particularly
tioned at the outset a chronic state of non-recognition,by which I mean
the gulf I feel between my experienceof twelve-tone and othernontonal
music, and what I've tendedto runinto as populardescriptionsof it. Despite a general tendencyto dismiss this music as intellectualpatterning,
it has been the intense emotionaldirectnessof this music thathas drawn
me to it andkept me enthralled,andmy experiencehas only been heightened and broadenedby the time I have spent studyingit. Perhapsby emphasizingthe physical side of playing music by Webernand Babbitt-or
of
Schoenbergand Carter,for thatmatter-I can enlargean appreciation
this music as humanaction.
Milton Babbitt'sMy Ends Are My Beginnings is a big work for solo
clarinetist.While the score, like all of Babbitt'smusic, is bereftof any of
the traditionaldescriptiveexpressivemarkings,it is composed in such a
way that,like SuzanneCusick's Bach example, it carriesa clear message
it.
to the player of how to understand In the course of its three sections,
the piece unfoldsthreeversions of a four-part
all-partition
arraybased on
two sets of combinatorialrow-pairs.18
Babbitt,a clarinetisthimself, has
placed the two strataof combinatorial
row-pairsabove and below the instrument'sregistralbreak.As a result, the player is guided to an understandingof the underlyingstructuresof the piece throughthe different
kindsof effortentailedin articulating
intervalswithin a register,or across
the registralbreak.While these intervalsare frequentlyof the same size,
it is the physical differencein playing thathelps marktheirdifferingsignificance. Similarly,in the rhythmicdomain,the significanceof rates of
attackmarkingeitherthe initiationof a span (beat) or a local subdivision
forms a majordistinctionin the composition.Althoughtherearefrequent
changes of context that will often change a given attack-rate'ssignificance from one functionto the other,the metricalcontext of each section
of the piece allows the player to feel the differencesbased on the changing sense of beat, measure and tempo. The music is responsive to the
physiology and mechanics of its playing, and a sensitive player will let
of
the piece guide him or her to an understanding its workings.A performance alive to those aspects of the piece can provokea similarlyrevealing response in its listeners.
This same physiological perspectiveinformsthe second movementof
While the differentvoices
AntonWeber's Variationsfor
Piano, Op. 27.19
of the canon underlyingthis movement are clearly delineatedrhythmically, thereis an additionallayer of articulation
providedby the elaborate
12

that
It
hand-crossing. is not merelythe sense of visual theatricality Webern
is after;rather,as his remarksto Peter Stadlen reveal, he was intensely
awareof this as music to be played, so thatthe very motion of the hands
and arms from note to note would imbue the sounds of the two voices
with a sense of their individualcontinuity,despite the constantchanges
in dynamics and register.20
Webernis not merely interestedin such and
such a note at such and such a dynamic at such and such a point; he is
also interestedin all of that in the context of the hand having traveleda
certaindistance,having had to play a differentnote in a differentplace at
a differentdynamic.The fact thatsome of the distanceswill impose a flexibility in the tempo, as well as give a certainchargeof dangerto the execution, seems to me to be as mucha partof the piece as the notatedpitches,
rhythmsanddynamics.In this light,Weber's music canbe heardin direct
relationto the opening of the Hammerklavier
Sonata.
structural
But thatis not all: the hand-crossingsserve an important
role
as well. As I and othershave detailedelsewhere, the movementemploys
a two-voice canon whose parts, while crossing constantly, are distinWhich voice is leading, and how that
guished by rhythmicplacement.21
is
relates to the underlyingrow structure, one of the centralissues of the
movement. In any given portion of the piece, each hand is projectinga
single voice of the canon, but changes of which hand is leading are not
coordinatedwith the changes of which voice is leading, except at a couple of critical spots. The changes of leading hand are reservedfor something else. As may be seen in Example 1, the hands switch for the first
time just at the returnof the opening dyad, preservingthe hand position
of thatdyad, and reservingthe widest possible crossing (from the high G
to the low B) for m. 13. The handsreturnto their originalrelationshipat
the momentthatmarksthe midpointof the firsthalf. The next change, at
the pickup to m. 9, is the passage thatmarksthe returnof what could be
The
called the opening tune.22 final change of hands,back to the disposition of the opening, comes with the final dyad of the half, which itself
also marksa one-beatpremature
change of leading voice. Duringthe second half of the piece, the handsmaintainthe relationshipof the opening,
until, once again, they switch at the final returnof the opening tune. One
switch remains, at m. 21, but this, most strikingly,is coordinatedwith a
premature
change of leading voice, allowing that moment multiple connections with the rest of the movement.23
Thus the hand changes articulate major motivic returns,as an additionallayer on top of the canonic
unfolding. This is just a sampling of some of the structural
significance
of the physicalhandmotionswritteninto all threemovementsof Weber's
Op. 27, but I hope it suggests once again how a message from composer
to performercan be passed on to the listener,throughthe way it sculpts
the performer'sactions.
13

Sehr schnellJ = ca. 160
e
tune

rf

*
)i
Iq ?j 7

e9b

y

4. S

-I

iP
7

? f
tune

5

,Il

It

f9

(

f

'p

ff

I f1

f

-r^rI

0

tS

p

,

19

^-^J

^

f-

^

^J

^v

if

Example 1

14

LT.

1

*

*

*

Music, in large part,is indeed somethingwe do. It is a way we speak
to each other,and often how we speakto ourselves.Thatthe mind can be
ravishedby the patternswe perceive in sounds I would never deny. But
how we perceive those sounds, and how we make those sounds, cannot
help but carrypart of the message. To ignore this is to ignore what, for
many of us, broughtus here in the firstplace. The study of music has its
own rewards,but it is good to remind oneself occasionally that music's
path to the mind is inevitablythroughthe body.

15

NOTES
1. Koestenbaum
1993offerssome superb
observations
aboutthephysicality singof
withit.
ing andhow listenersresonate
2. I am grateful Kendall
to
Walton a conversation thispoint.
for
on
3. This viewpointunderliesmuch of Emile Jacques-Dalcroze's
techEurhythmics
are
nique. The connectionsbetween physical motion and music-making also
in
workedoutin an analytical
framework Pierce1994.
4. Thispointis madein Lerdahl Jackendoff
and
1983,andis implicitin Cooperand
Meyer1960.
5. See Brower1993for a discussionof memoryandrhythmic
perception.
6. The last barof Ravel'sLa Valsecreatesan unnerving
sense of being brought
to
earththrough use of a brutal
the
of
replacement the delirious
triplemeterby four
beatsin the sametimespan.
7. Thisis coveredin Lakoff1987.
8. I am gratefulboth to NancyFloridafor pointingout the scalingwordsused for
Zbikowski drawing attention Barker1989
to
for
gamelanmusic,andto Larry
my
for the information
aboutGreektheory.
9. This turnsout not alwaysto be the case. In tryingthis out at home I foundthat
whileit worked me, it didnotworkforanother
for
of
member thehousehold,
who,
however,can sing morethana full octaveabovethe traditional
soprano
high C.
case.
This,I assume,is an exceptional
10. Forexample,if our way of producing
soundinvolvedrigidtubesthatalowedan
of
would not necessarilybe a
easy production partials,then next-easiest-note
if
as
step away.Furthermore, ourhearingdid not recognizeoctaveequivalency a
'close' relationship,
whatmightsound'good'together
could well be soundsthat
were registrally
or
proximate, perhapssoundsthatwere not the same pitch,but
the
series.Thecombination thesetwo
of
represented samepositionin theovertone
a
set
for
posibilitieswouldproduce verydifferent of criteria makingmusic!
11. Suchextensionsandtheroleof metaphor
therein beingexamined a number
are
by
of theorists
who havetakenthe workof MarkJohnson
(1987) as a starting
point.
A recentpanelat the Society for MusicTheory'sNationalConference Baton
in
on
Candace
Saslaw,
Brower,
by
Rouge(1996)included
presentations Johnson Janna
SteveLarson,Marianne
Zbikowski myself.The work
and
Kielian-Gilbert,
Larry
withGuck1980)explorestheroleof metaphor musiof Marion
Guck(starting
in
cal understanding,
overa wide rangeof topics.FredMaus(1988) has also
spread
musicalunderstanding termsof human
in
actionin a somewhat
different
explored
way.
12. I wantto be carefulto allay any impression I mightfeel thatone or another
that
kind of music makingis more or less 'natural.' humanmind and body are
The
of
to
kinds of interpretations
flexible,and highly adaptive different
enormously
stimuli.For example,while the diatoniccollectionand the majorscale can be
derivedfrom the overtoneseries, and while we may play and sing much tonal
music usingjust intonation, are also able to hearandunderstand
we
equaltemas
of
also
however,
perament a representation just intervals.
Equaltemperament,
carriesits own possibilitiesfor musicalstructure are not possiblewithjust
that
kindsof musicalstrucintonation.
Thus,while I mightreflecton the ways certain
tures emergefrom certainphysiologicalconstraints,
that does not mean that I

16

believetheyaretheonly structures mightso arise,orthatthoseparticular
that
constraints the only thingsconditioning creation music.
are
the
of
13. Thistoo canbe extended
witha littlethought
whichcanalso illustrate
experiment,
further pointthatthehuman
the
mindis highlyadaptive.
Withnot muchworkone
an
whichcouldbe controlled squeezing
could construct electronicinstrument
by
eithera rigidball or a soft ball.The difference
herewouldbe betweencontrolby
muscletension,or muscleposition.Thecontrolcouldbe appliedin variousways.
Forinstance,
controlcouldbe of pitch,or of volume,andit couldbe riggedso that
highertension(or moreclosed position)could be eitherpositivelyor negatively
correlated
witheitherfrequency volume.Whichhandcontrolspitchor volume
or
couldbe anadditional
or
to
variable, one couldextendtheinstrument be controlled
a
of
by any set of muscles.Withthis setup,one couldconstruct number different
each of whichwouldhavedifferent
characteristics.
Pitchcouldbe a
instruments,
matter positionor tension, as couldvolume,andhighandlow andloudand
of
just
soft couldbe variously
correlated tensionandrelaxation.
with
Eachmusicalspace
so constructed
wouldbe different, I believethateachcouldbe learnable. is
but
It
in
interestingto imagine an instrument which makinga soft descendingscale
woulddependon an increaseof muscletension,andthe sortsof musicone would
wantto makeon it. I am indebted Dr.JereMeadof the Harvard
to
Schoolof Public Healthfor a number conversations theseissues.
of
on
14. In the nineteenth
for
century,FranzLiszt designedan alternative
keyboard the
both by free-bassaccordianists by some piano
and
piano thathas been adapted
manufacturers. laying out pitchesin a diamond
the
makes
By
pattern, keyboard
certainlargeleapsandstretches
mucheasierfor smallerhands.I haveseen a performance worksof Chopinon suchan instrument, whilethe music-making
of
and
was wonderful, foundit strange see handmotionsI wouldmorereadilyassoI
to
ciate with a courtstenographer
double
being used to producethe sixteenth-note
in
octave figuration the thirdBallade. Liszt's keyboard
radicallychallengesthe
realmof virtuosity the pianoby changingthe rangeof whatis effortful.
on
in
15. Theseappear Walton1997.
16. It is interesting note, however,thatChinesecaligraphy
to
dependson a sense of
I
the physicalactionof its makingto be best understood. am indebtedto Nancy
Rao for an interesting
conversation this. I expectthatsuchappreciation
on
could
well applyto a greatdeal of visualart.
17.The 'airguitar'is probably widest-played
the
in
instrument the country.
18. A moreextended
structure this workmaybe
of
analysisof thepitchandrhythmic
foundin Mead 1994,alongwith a generaldescription Babbitt's
of
compositional
techniques.

19.Thismovement receiveda lot of analytical
has
attention. Babbitt1960,Bailey
See
1991,Koivisto1996,Lewin1962and1993,Mead1993,Nolan 1989.Wason1987,
andWestergaard
1963.
20. See Wason1987for a discussionof Stadlen's
edition.
performance
21. See especiallyLewin 1962,Lewin 1993,Nolan 1989andWestergaard
1963.
22. See bothLewin 1993andKoivisto1996.
23. See Mead 1993.

17

WORKS CII'ED
Invariants Compositional
as
Determinants."
Babbitt,Milton. 1960. "Twelve-Tone
in
MusicalQuarterly
Music:The
46(2): 246-59. (Reprinted Problems Modern
of
PrincetonSeminarin Advanced
MusicalStudies.Ed. PaulHenryLang, 108-21.
New York:
Norton,1962.)
MusicofAntonWebern: Forms a New
Old
1991.TheTwelve-Note
in
Bailey,Katherine.
and
Press.
Language.
Cambridge New York:
Cambridge
University
ed.
MusicalWritings,
Volume Harmonic
II:
andAcoustic
Barker,
Andrew, 1989.Greek
Press.
Theory.
University
Cambridge:
Cambridge
and
Music Theory
Brower,Candace.1993. "Memory the Perceptionof Rhythm."
15(1): 19-35.
Spectrum
and
New York:
Butler,David. 1992. TheMusician'sGuideto Perception Cognition.
Schirmer
Books.
and
B.
Structure Music.
of
Cooper,Grosvenor Leonard Meyer.1960. TheRhythmic
of
The
Chicago: University ChicagoPress.
with Music:A SeriousEffort
Cusick,SuzanneG. 1994. "Ona LesbianRelationship
In
Not to ThinkStraight." Queering Pitch,ed. PhillipBrett,Elizabeth
the
Wood,
andGaryThomas,67-84. NewYork:
Routledge.
. 1994a."Feminist
MusicTheory, the Mind/Body
and
PerProblem."
Theory,
spectivesof NewMusic32(1): 8-27.
in
The
of
Guck,Marion.1980. "Metaphor MusicalDiscourse: Contribution Imagery
to Analysis."
Ph.D.diss., University Michigan.
of
Mark.1987. TheBodyin theMind:TheBodilyBasis of Meaning,
Johnson,
Imaginaof
tionand Reason.Chicago:University ChicagoPress.
and
Koestenbaum,
Wayne. 1993. The Queen'sThroat:Opera,Homosexuality the
PoseidonPress.
Mystery Desire.NewYork:
of
Tina.1996.TheMoment theFlow:Understanding
in
and
Koivisto,
Continuity CoherPh.D.diss., University Michigan.
of
ence in SelectedAtonalCompositions.
of
Lakoff,George.1987. Women,
Fire,and DangerousThings.Chicago:University
ChicagoPress.
FredandRayJackendoff.
1983.A Generative
Music.CamLerdahl,
Theoryof Tonal
bridge:MITPress.
in
Problem Webern's 27."Journal MusicTheLewin,David.1962."AMetrical
of
Op.
ory 6(1): 124-32.
and
New
.1987. Generalized
MusicalIntervals TheirTransformations. Haven:
YaleUniversity
Press.
Music
and
. 1986. "MusicTheory,Phenomenology Modes of Perception."
3(4): 327-92.
Perception
in
.1993. "AMetrical
Problem Weber's Op.27."MusicAnalysis12(3):34354.
MusicTheorySpectrum
Maus,Fred.1988. "Musicas Drama."
10(1):56-73.
and 'Composingwith Twelve Tones'."
Mead,Andrew.1993. "Weber, Tradition,
MusicTheorySpectrum
15(2): 173-204.
1994.An Introduction the Musicof MiltonBabbitt.Princeton:
to
Princeton
Press.
University
in
Music.
1989.Hierarchic
Linear
Structures Weber's Twelve-Tone
Nolan,Catherine.
Ph.D.diss.,YaleUniversity.
18

1994. "Developing
Schenkerian
IntePierce,Alexandra.
HearingandPerformance."
gral 8: 51-124.
with Imagination: MusicRepresentational?"
Is
In
Walton,Kendall.1997. "Listening
Music and Meaning,ed. JeneferRobinson,57-82. Ithacaand London:Cornell
Press.
University
for
and
Wason,Robert.1987. "Weber's Variations Piano,Op. 27: MusicalStructure
the Performance
Score."
Integral1: 57-103.
An
and
Peter.1963."Webem 'TotalOrganization': Analysisof the SecWestergaard,
of
ond Movement the PianoVariations, 27."Perspectives New Music 1(2):
of
Op.
107-20.

19

