Yale University Department of Music

Beethoven's "Sketches for the First Movement of Op. 14, No. 1: A Study in Design"
Author(s): Carl Schachter and Beethoven
Source: Journal of Music Theory, Vol. 26, No. 1 (Spring, 1982), pp. 1-21
Published by: Duke University Press on behalf of the Yale University Department of Music
Stable URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/843353
Accessed: 15/12/2009 18:15
Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of JSTOR's Terms and Conditions of Use, available at
http://www.jstor.org/page/info/about/policies/terms.jsp. JSTOR's Terms and Conditions of Use provides, in part, that unless
you have obtained prior permission, you may not download an entire issue of a journal or multiple copies of articles, and you
may use content in the JSTOR archive only for your personal, non-commercial use.
Please contact the publisher regarding any further use of this work. Publisher contact information may be obtained at
http://www.jstor.org/action/showPublisher?publisherCode=duke.
Each copy of any part of a JSTOR transmission must contain the same copyright notice that appears on the screen or printed
page of such transmission.
JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide range of
content in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and facilitate new forms
of scholarship. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.

Duke University Press and Yale University Department of Music are collaborating with JSTOR to digitize,
preserve and extend access to Journal of Music Theory.

http://www.jstor.org

BEETHOVEN'S SKETCHES FOR THE
FIRST MOVEMENT OF OP. 14, NO. 1:
A STUDY IN DESIGN

CarlSchachter

The musicianwho wants to deepen his understanding Beethoven's
of
Piano Sonata, op. 14, no. 1, has availableto him a good deal of material
to supplementthe printed score. Beethoven'sautograph-like those of
the other early sonatas-has disappeared,but by way of compensation
there is his unique recomposition of the sonata as a string quartet. In
addition an unusuallylarge and highly fascinatingbody of sketcheshas
survived;those for the first movement form the subjectof this article. I
do not intend to discuss these sketches in anything approachingcomplete detail. InsteadI shall concentrateon some significantfeaturesthat
have not been dealt with very much in the ratherextensive literature
about op. 14/1. These features suggest interestinginsights into the finished movement and even provide a basis for some cautious generalizations about Beethoven'scompositionaltechnique and about the relation
of sketch study to analysis.
The surviving
sketches (which seem to be fairly complete) are now to
be found in four different cities: London, Berlin,Stockholm, and Washington. Most of them form part of the "Kafka"miscellany owned by
the British Library.One very important sketch is found in the "Fischhof" miscellany in the Staatsbibliothek Pre,ussischer
Kulturbesitz in
West Berlin. Finally there are three fragments divided up among two
1

Stockholm collections and the Libraryof Congress.Douglas Johnson
has shown that these fragmentsoriginally belonged to a single leaf.1
Musicianswith an interest in sketches have known about the Fischhof
and Kafka sketches for a long time, ever since GustavNottebohm transcribedand publishedthe greaterpart of them morethan a centuryago.2
For the last decade the complete London source has been availablein
both facsimile and transcriptionin a splendid publication by Joseph
Kerman.3Douglas Johnson's remarkablycomprehensivestudy and reconstructionof Fischhof containsnot only the Berlinsketch of op. 14/1
in transcriptionbut also the Stockholm and Washingtonfragments.4
are
Photocopies of all the extant sketches (as well as transcriptions) included in a carefullydone thesis by JenniferGild.5
The sonata was published (together with its companionin G major)
by Mollo of Viennain December, 1799. Nottebohm believedthat it had
been composed much earlier, in 1795. There is compelling evidence,
however, for the view that Beethoven composed it in 1798; Johnson
gives a very clearsummaryof this evidence.6
THE RISING FOURTH

Workingback from the finished composition to the sketch is often
as helpful as working forwardfrom the sketch to the composition. In
the case of op. 14/1, the first four measuresof the sonata (Example 1)
providethe best initialvantagepoint for viewingmanyimportantfeatures
of the sketches. The idea that fills these four measuresis a most remarkableone: both the largershapeand its most prominentcomponent
figure echo the rising fourth between the first two notes, b1 and e2.
Thus the entire sopranoline rises from the bl of measure1 to the e3 of
measure4; the line, therefore, representsthe initial fourth expandedin
time from one bar to four and in size from a simpleintervalto a com2
pound one. This expanded fourth is filled in by two passingtones, c
and d# 2, that fall on the downbeatsof measures2 and 3; because of the
passingtones, the expandedfourth is expressedas a stepwiselinearprogression, bl-c 2-dF2-e3. Nested within this overarching linear progres-

sion is a smaller filled-in fourth (m. 4), emphasized by a new and
characteristic
rhythm. The small fourth helps to transferthe goal tone
to the three-lineoctave;throughmotivic associationit also strengthup
ens its connection to the initial tone, b1.
of
Note how the large fourth-progression the right-hand
part is reinthe uppermostnotes of the left hand, which double it at the
forced by
lower octave. In addition, Beethoven'sslurshelp the playerprojectboth
The new slurat the head of
the large and the small fourth progressions.
measure3 emphasizesdt2 and thus helps to connect it to e3 (measure
4), which is separatedfrom it both in registerand in temporalsequence.
The slurover measure4 isolatesanddefinesthe smallfourth-progression.

2

Example 1. Op. 14/1, 1st mvt., m. 1-4

IP
1j

#

>.d

IP'e

I~~~

5"lx~~~-~

~XUIlf~~5

Example2. Berlinsketch
3

jjt:Fv
;=
v

f 1UlLT^C^^

^(4f
t#
v(

;JF

,
F'WP

1

I

20

1%1#0~~~~~~~~~~~~~
i1

J

I;

4

f<0A nY
I /O

I ItI#"l

i

O
/

-

1i^
I

.

v

y

T

Example2. Berlinsketch (continued)

4

:11
a

These first four measures(and the two that follow them) appearin
almost their final form in the earliest extant sketch-the one in the
Fischhof miscellany. Example 2 shows this sketch. For the most part it
follows Nottebohm, who transcribedthe first twenty measures,but I
have added the last three bars, using Johnson's transcriptionand the
photocopy of the originalin Gild.7 The sketch shows a complete miniature exposition, twenty-three measureslong. The definitiveappearance
of measures1-6 is all the more strikingin that the rest of the exposition
bears little outward resemblanceto the finished work and is, in some
ways, rathercrudely put together. The tonic groupends with a strongly
articulated half cadence (mm. 7-8). With astonishing abruptnessthe
bridge begins in G major(m. 9); it leads, throughthe V of B major,to a
dominant group containing two ideas, a "second theme" (mm. 14-18)
and a codetta, (mm. 18-23), which is the unmistakable
ancestorof the
corresponding
part (mm. 57-60) of the publishedpiece.
The guiding idea of this sketch is most immediatelyevident in the
second theme, which begins the dominant group. The first phase of
this idea is based on a stepwise line risingfrom b (middle of m. 14) to
e2; Beethoven emphasizesthis latter pitch by its position as goal of the
ascent, by its duration, and by its insistent repetition. The boundary
tones of this line, bl and e2, representthe rising fourth of measure 1,
but now transplantedinto a B-major
environment;the stepwisemotion
from b1 to e2 recallsthe linearcomposing-outof the fourth in measures
1-4. Even the registerin which the fourth occurs is the same as that of
measure 1. In its new context, however, the fourth takes on a very different meaning; the e2, in particular,no longer functions as a stable
element, for it forms a dissonancewith the local tonic triad,andit is constrainedto resolveto the dS2 that follows it.
Except perhaps for general features of texture and contour, very
little of this thematic idea found its way into the corresponding
part of
the completed movement. The sixteenth notes that lead into it-falling
from f#2 to b'-have the contour of the upbeat to the final versionof
the "second theme." In both the sketch and the sonata the descent is
followed by a rising line, but in the sonata this line does not evoke the
initial rising fourth, for it does not lead to e2. Although he did not incorporate it into the completed first movement, Beethoven may not
have discardedthis sketchedidea, for it is strikinglysimilarto the opening of the third movement of op. 14/1 (Example 3); this sketch, then,
may well be the source for the Finale'sopening theme.
Of the two remainingparts of the Berlin sketch-the bridgeand the
codetta-the latter is by far the less problematic.It begins, as does the
correspondingpart of the completed movement, with a quotation of
the fourth, B-E, of measure 1, in its originalhalf-note rhythmbut in a
bass register.The bridge,however,is much more difficult to understand.
The turn to G major is so abrupt and seemingly unmotivatedthat one
5

a. Rondo theme

4
I
(6"o K'r V
iJ

col

p
,P

f"e/ rrr
r

ir

+
n 1A..

8va

r

C c.
cresC.

b. Sketch for 1st movement, transposed to E

=

PE

r

#R

-- C r^

lr

Example 3

14

12

1-4

I

E9r-rW

r:

G:

E

1
Fr

B:

I

j ^' lr
r

11

r

Example 4

15

A1 12

.J J If
I.
Ir

,j
~~-~"j.j 1.J 1i,J

it

bridge)

20

7

1# J

j

I I" I
r

;

=
E

(C2nd theme')

25

I
LL:"

j C
10;j 'J r
<
etc.

J

6

04

T

i- irf- T

I rt r

Example 5. London 1

wonders what Beethoven had in mind. Part of the answersurelylies in
the sixteenth-note figuration of measure 12, for the emphasizednotes
are B, Ct, Do, and E, yet another transformationof our risingfourth.
The G-major
context leads to the substitutionof C I and Dg for C# and
DS. And as in the coming B-majortheme, the E lies outside the local
tonic chord; here it functions as upper neighborto the following Dt .
Despite these differences the connection, both to the beginningand to
the B-major
theme that follows, is undeniable.
In this draft, then, the four segmentsof the exposition-tonic theme,
bridge, dominant theme, and codetta-are linked by the prominent
appearancein each of them of the initial rising fourth. The fourth remains at the same pitch level, from B to E, even though it appearsin
three different keys: E, G, and B (Example 4). It was evidently Beethoven's intention to pursue this fourth throughout the course of the
entire tonal progressof the exposition.
As the sketchesin the London sourceindicate, Beethovencontinued
trying to connect the various strains of the exposition by using the
fourth, B-E, as a common element. But is was an enterprisein which he
was not fated to succeed. Among the London sketchesare three drafts
of the entire exposition, which 1 shall call London 1, 2, and 3. London
1 leaves out the first eight bars of the final version;the other two drafts
are complete.8 Example 5 shows the bridge and the opening strain of
the dominantgroupfrom London 1.
The bridge is aleady very close to its final version; the shift to G
of
never
majorand the transformation the B-E motive have disappeared
to returnin any subsequentsketch. The second theme, however,is even
further away from its eventual form than was the one in the Berlin
sketch. It consists of a point of imitation with three entrances,arranged
more or less like a fugal exposition. And the "subject"of this fugato
begins with our risingfourth, B-E (Example5, m. 19). Withits rhythmic
angularityand "learned"character,this theme seems almost totally out
of keepingwith the restof the sketchedexposition;the notion that Beethoven was trying out variousways of transformingthe motivic fourth
accounts at least partially for the strangeappearance a fugato at this
of
point in the exposition.
In the London2 draft,the bridgeis so close to its definitiveform that I
shall not quote it in Example 6. As the example shows, the second
theme now beginsto resemblethe final version.In the sketch, however,
the melodic line breaks up into two segments,each in a differentregister. The first segment begins with our fourth, expressed as b-e1 (the
same as the correspondingnotes in London 1 and in the same register).
And althoughthe second note in London 2 is shorterthan in London 1,
the rhythm of attacksis the same in both sketchesand, for that matter,
the same as that of measure1.
London 3 differs significantlyfrom the publishedexposition only in
7

24

etc.

ar~~

Example7. First sketch for development

a. Sketch for recapitulation

etc.

b. Final version:beginningof recapitulation
91

B-E

f

Example8
8

the six barsthat precedethe codetta; by this time Beethovenhas finally
abandonedhis attempt to make the risingfourth a prominentfeature of
the first B-majortheme. It is perhapsnot altogetherfanciful to see a
trend toward this abandonmentin the sequenceof earliersketches, for
E, the upper note of the fourth, has dwindled from five notes filling
three beats (Berlin)to a dotted quarternote (London 1) and then to an
eighth (London 2) before we reach this version, where the fourth disappearsaltogether.
Neither the development nor the recapitulation went through as
many stages as the exposition. Almost all of the extant sketches for the
development are in the London source;Example7 shows the earliest,a
sketch for the opening of the section.9 It appearson the pagewhere the
first B-majortheme receivedits more or less final form. Just before and
obviously connected with it is a sketch for the dominant group;this
sketch, which contains the definitive second theme, was incorporated
into London 3, furtherdown on the same page. Thus Beethovenalmost
certainly wrote the first sketch for the development after having comafter havpleted most of his work on the exposition and, in particular,
ing given up his attemptto beginthe second theme with the B-E motive.
As if to compensate for this sacrifice, the first five measuresof this
sketch for the development contain yet a new transformationof the
motive, placed in a high registerand probably animatedby a chain of
trills. Beethoven was soon to abandon this new effort on behalf of the
motive. The next sketch begins much like the final version and breaks
off with the words "ohne das Thema durchzufuhren"("without
developingthe theme").10
Recapitulationsobviously offer less scope for new transformations
of a basic motive than expositions and developments. However one
small detail of this recapitulationmay representsuch a transformation.
The London source contains one complete draft of the recapitulation
and coda together with a few smallersketches. The draft begins with
just the soprano line and would appearto representan unchangedquotation of the opening. The bridge takes the theme to C major and
accompaniesit with two-octave scales in the left-handpart.1 In a later
sketch, Beethoven transferredthese scales to the opening of the recapitulation; this change was retained in the published movement.12
Example 8 suggests a possible reason for the change: the culminating
notes of the scales(see brackets)might be viewed as anothermanifestation of the B-E motive. Although the possibilityof coincidence cannot
be ruled out in a case like this, it is certainlyconceivablethat the revision was made in order to state the motive at its primarypitch levelbetween B and E.
Beethoven's attempts to maintain the originalpitch level of the B-E
motive did not at all preventhis using the motive in a less rigorousway.
9

Indeed measures5-6 of the Berlin sketch (and of the completed movement) contain figuration whose accented notes, G# -A-B-C#, form a
rising fourth (see Example 2). This pattern certainly grows out of the
B-E motive even though the goal tone, C#, is simply the upperneighbor
of the main tone, B, that follows.
a
Transposing tonic-key motive to the dominant in the exposition's
second group can take on a specialmeaningin sonata-form
movements,
for in the recapitulation, the transposed motive will reappearin its
original tonic form. Beethoven introduced such transposedfourths at
four different points in the dominantgroup and at four different stages
of the compositionalprocess. The first instance occurs in London 1 in
a part of the sketch that corresponds measures46-49 of the finished
to
movement;note the similarityof the left-hand figureto the rhythm of
measure4 (Example9).
A more prominenttransposedfourth makes its appearancein London 3, at the second strainof the dominantgroup(Example 10). In the
sketch the rhythmic shape is identical to that of measure4, but in the
final version (mm. 39-40) a turn replacesthe two sixteenth notes, so
that the figure no longer conforms exactly to its model. Nottebohm
commented on this change, speculatingthat Beethoven preferredto
avoid a thematic correspondencein orderto preservethe light, graceful
character of the work. Neither he nor Tovey, who makes much the
same point, seems to have noticed just how much thematic correspondence Beethoven was trying to introduce into this light, graceful
work.13

The closing strainof the B-major
groupin London 2 contains a rising
fourth that does not relate so obviously to any previous statement
(Example 11). Indeed in the sketch itself this fourth does not seem to
express any strong motivic connection with earlierones. In the finished
movement (m. 50), however, the idea occurs soon after the similar
figure quoted in Example 10; the proximity gives it a more explicitly
motivic character.Interestingly,Beethoven discardedthis idea in London 3, only to bring it back in the Washingtonand Stockholm draftprobablythe last sketch for the exposition.
The Washingtonfragment of this draft introduces the last, and in
some ways the most interesting, manifestation of the transposed
fourth (Example 12). It occurs in the last big cadence,just before the
codetta (mm. 54-57 of the exposition), and it is characterizedby a
most expressiveregistertransfer,a downwardleap of almost two octaves
that prepares the low register of the codetta.14 This beautiful transformation of the fourth takes on particularsignificancewhen it reappearsin the recapitulation,as we shall see presently.

10

*J
r 1P4

L
_<1

-

t

q

Example~~~~~<
9. L
oetcc
Il

Example9. London 1

-

Example 10. London 3

#

~..-r"r

54

i-r- #J.

-^*n'
uiR

m

I1 Ip - rThp7

Example 11. London 2

Fl

Gd

Bt

Al

sketch
Example 12. Washington/Stockholm
11

THECHROMATIC
MOTIVE
element in the
The rising fourth is not the only importantrecurring
design of this movement. Any perceptive and attentive performeror
listener must be struck by the frequent use throughout the exposition
of Gt and its enharmonicequivalent, Fx. The persistentintroduction
of this chromatic sound is all the more strikingsince the exposition is
otherwise very diatonic. Example 13 shows the most importantappearances of Gl /Fx in the three London drafts and in op. 14/1. The altered
note usually functions as a chromatic passing tone; even where it is
literally a neighbor (13a and m. 46 of op. 14/1), the continuation of
the line to Ft-G$ suggestsa passingmotion, F# -Fx-G#, a motion that
becomes explicit in the climacticmeasures(54-55) of the exposition.
In a sense the chromaticismformed part of Beethoven'sconception
turn to G major in the bridge
from the very beginning.The surprising
section of the Berlinsketch fits into a largermotion from E major(with
G# as third) to F# as V of B. In its simplest form, the chromaticprogression inherent in this plan would constitute a passingmotion in one
voice: G#-Gk -F#. This can be seen in Example 14, which attempts to
reconstruct the larger harmonic and voice-leadingimplications of the
Berlinsketch. It is partlyconjectural,as must be any analysisof a sketch
that lacks the articulativeelements-including many of the notes-that
would clarify the structureof a finishedcomposition. But I believe that
the conjectures are well founded-especially the assumption that the
G major preparesan augmented sixth chord that derivesby voice exchangefrom the initialtonic andthat resolvesto the V of B. (If I am correct, the C major that becomes an augmentedsixth in the parallelpart
of the recapitulationcould be an outgrowthof this idea.)15
In the Berlin sketch, as representedin Example 14, the Gt forms
part of a large middlegroundprogression and is not in any sense a
this
"motive."It is fascinatingto observehow Beethoventransforms hidmotive shownin Example13.
den pitch successioninto the foreground
The progression F -Fx-G$ cannot function as a self-contained
melodic entity; it traverses
only a second ratherthan a chordalinterval,
and its goal tone, G#, lies outside the local tonic. Thereforethe motive
mostly serves to ornament a larger melodic line, the G$ functioning
as the upper neighbor of F#. At its final and climactic appearancein
measures 54-55, however, the chromatic progressioncontinues on to
A# and B (Example 12); it becomes absorbedinto the basic figure of
the rising fourth and thereby leads at last to a goal. It is an important
goal, for this B functions as the melodic resolution(I) of the dominant
group, the top-voice note of its main cadential I. What Beethoven has
achievedhere is not merely a mechanicalcombination of motives, but
rather a profoundly beautiful integrationof the motivic designinto the
largertonal structure.
12

a. London 1 and all later versions

~~~.

~J
F%

-I

l

(Ft)

G5{

GI

b. London 2
30

GO

I8

:

"

Gk

r

11

rTrV
Gtr

r

Pi4

c. London 3 and op. 14/1

f~

F

54

Fn G#

FS

Example 13. The chromaticmotive

1j",--

(. G

.

G4

3.

F#)

Example 14. Berlinsketch: voice-leadinggraph

13

The downward register transfer of measures55-56 (g#2-a#) leaves
a residue of tension at the end of the exposition, for the g$2 is not
continued and resolved in its own register.Such tension would be less
appropriateat the end of the movement. In the coda, therefore, Beethoven introduces d# 3 and e3 in a very prominentway; these notes connect in register with the chromatic motive (b2-b$2-c#3) of measures
145-146. Thus Beethoven leads the chromaticmotive to a goal in its
own register and closes the movement with a wonderful final transformationof the risingfourth, B-E (Example 15).
The appearance the chromaticmotive at the climacticcadencesof
of
the exposition and the recapitulation
(measures54-55 and 145-146) is
a featureof the last extant draftsfor these sections, those in Stockholm
and Washington.From internal evidence it is clear that the two drafts
were writtenaroundthe same time and that both arelater than the draft
of the recapitulationin the London source, where the closing theme is
the same as in the last London sketch of the exposition.'6 Thus the
subtle and expressivetransformationof the fourth that bridgesrecapitulation and coda may well representBeethoven'slast important piece
of compositionalwork on the movement.
IMPLICATIONS THESKETCHES
OF

Probably the most striking aspect of these sketches-especially the
ones for the exposition-is the tenacity with which Beethovenstruggled
to retain the motivic B-E at its originalpitch level even where the foreground key changes. I find it impossibleto believe that this was not a
fully conscious process; if I am correct, then one must conclude that
Beethoven attached a positive value to the tightly unified design he
would have achieved had he succeeded in these efforts. And, indeed,
many benefits accrue to a piece in which an importantmotivic element
persists untransposedthrough changes of key. For listenerswith good
ears, the familiarpitches serve as a measureof the tonal distance that
the piece has traversed,for any changeis best measuredin relationto a
constant. Or to put it another way, since these patterns project into
new key areas pitches originally associated with the tonic key, they
serve to remind the listener of the tonic at the very time when other
tonal areasarebeingexplored.In addition, repeatinga patternof pitches
its
while changing tonal meaninghelps to elaboratethe fabricof internal
associationsfrom which any greatpiece of music derivesso much of its
fascination.
The use of untransposedpitch successionsin new keys has received
little attention in the publishedliterature,but it occurs in very many
pieces. Beethoven must have observedit in works by his great predecessors, for one can find marvellousexamples by such masters as Handel,
Haydn, and Mozart. Beethoven himself employed this technique in
many works, including some written around the time of op. 14/1; the
14

Example 15. Op. 14/1, recapitulation and coda

U? J. |I
j

a.

1. 1I1I

I,

C.

*l

"

b.

r

nfu

-4"'

-;rn n

Cm
Cr
to

:
"

53

0 410 t

I

'

r

UJl

?

I

^

ir

J

l

i

A
n
A:

*ft-

1lsI

v

v

A

390t'

39i

+

fa

l

< b:II

Tr1i:

d.

t

..

'k

_

I

*

r

, L

.

r

A:

sf

*#.4L4~A

_C

e.

'4 __M~
I I
Example 16. Op. 10/3, 1st mvt.
15

first movements of the Piano Sonata, op. 10/3, is an outstanding
example that suggests what Beethoven might have been trying to
accomplish with op. 14/1. The first four notes of the movement,
D-CS-B-A, form an importantmotive whose pitches aremaintainedintact (or almost intact) throughtwo changesof key (Example 16a). The
motive forms an importantpart of the highly originalbridgetheme in B
minor;the only change in pitch is a chromaticadjustmentof A to At
(Ex. 16b). A strikingaugmentationmarksthe climax of the harmonic
transition from B minor to A major(Ex. 16c). A diminutionbegins the
first strainof the dominantgroup(Ex. 16d); later on the motive is transposed to A-G$ -F# -E (Ex. 16e). A comparisonof these events with the
Berlinsketch of op. 14/1 is most revealing(Examples2 and 4).
One wonderswhy Beethovenwas unableto achievein op. 14/1 what
he accomplished so brilliantly in op. 10/3. My hunch is that he was
stymied more by the way he eventuallywanted to use the fourth-motive
than by the motive itself, though an untransposedfourth does not
easily changeits tonal habitat. If we comparethe B-majortheme of Berlin with those in London 1 and 2, we see that Beethovenfirst expanded
the fourth and filled it in with passingtones, whereasthe later themes
begin with skips from B to E, exactly like the beginningof the movement. In addition the expanded B-E of the Berlin draftunfolds over a
polyphonic accompanimentwhereasthe two London sketches(and the
final version) have an unaccompaniedmelody at the beginningof the
B-majorsection.
Now a melodicfourth,like the fifth of which it is the inversion,functions as the defining interval of a triad. Thus the fourth from B to E
projects E as a triadicroot and-in the absenceof contraryinformation
-suggests E as the tonic of a key. Only if the E functions as a nonharmonic tone will it stop soundinglike a root and, perhaps,a tonic.
But in the second themes of the two London drafts, Beethoven introduces the B-E in an unaccompaniedsetting and before any B-major
chord has been heard as a local tonic. In these circumstancesit is very
difficult-if not impossible-to define the E as non-harmonic.That is
why the Berlin sketch-the earliest of them all-curiously enough is
the most successful at integratingthe fourth into a B-majorcontext. In
the London sketches, the E still retains too many of its earliertriadic
associations and thus seems to contradict the modulation to V that
Beethovenhad preparedin the bridgesection.
One must rememberthat Beethoven, unable to carry through his
originalplan, did not abandonthe piece but adopted a different sort of
design, one characterizedby a looser web of motivic relationships.
Furthermorehe thought enough of the sonatato reworkand publishit
as a string quartet. This suggeststhat one shouldview with caution any
approachto analysisthat makes thematic or motivic uniformitydeterminative of the structureof tonal music. Rudolph Reti's discussion of
16

op. 14/1 is worth a glance in orderto show to what irrelevancies-occasionallyinterrupted a genuineinsight-such an approachcan lead.17
by
In view of how difficult it is to decipher Beethoven's sketches, it is
small wonder that transcriptionsby different scholarswill sometimes
of
vary. In DouglasJohnson'stranscription the Berlindraft, for example,
the first note of the B-majortheme (measure14) is c#2 ratherthan the
b1 that I have shown in Example2. And in Kerman'sreadingof London
1, the second note of the second theme (Example 5, m. 8) is f#1 rather
than el as in my example. If one follows Kermanand Johnson, the B-E
motive vanishes from the beginning of the exposition's B-majorpart;
with it vanishesthe basis for much of what I've written about the meaning of these sketches.
I am convinced that the readingsI have presented are the correct
ones, for they alone permit a coherent picture to emerge from a comparisonof sketch to sketch and of sketch to completed movement. Of
course there is a circularityin my reasoning:I use the sketches to discover a compositional idea, and then reversemyself and use the idea to
decide how to read the sketches. But there is no way to avoid such
circles in this kind of study; one can only proceed warily along them
armed with common sense. A. E. Housmanmade much the same point
in discussinga similarproblem that arises in evaluatingthe sources of
classicalliteraryworks.
The paradox is more formidablein appearancethan in reality, and
has plenty of analogies in daily life. In a trial or lawsuit the jury's
verdict is mainly based upon the evidence of the witnesses;but that
does not prevent the jury from making up its mind, from the evidence in general, that one or more witnesses have been guilty of
18
perjuryand that their evidenceis to be disregarded.
In the opus 14 sketches the "evidencein general"suggeststhat Beethoven was attempting to use B-E as a basic motive; and in this case, as
it happens, there is no conflicting testimony to be disregarded. my
To
eye, the notes in question look more like b' and el than like c#2 and
fl1. They looked that way to Nottebohm also; he transcribedthe two
passagesjust as I have shown them, and he was certainly not trying to
prove an analytic point. To be sure, Beethoven wrote the sketches for
himself alone and did not bother with calligraphicniceties. His marksmanship is often inexact, and notes sometimesfall on lines or in spaces
that cannot possibly be the intended ones. If a literal transcription
has
producesnonsense, the transcriber the rightto offer an emendation,
as long as he indicates that he is doing so. As it happens,both Johnson
and Kermanare carefulto showthe conjecturalnatureof their readings;
Johnson has a question mark under his c#2, and Kermancites Nottebohm's conflicting transcriptionin an explanatory note.19 In the note
he explains that his ftf is more "orthodox" than Nottebohm's el; by
17

this he presumablymeans that the imitative entrances in his version
alternate fifth and fourth in the mannerof a fugue exposition with a
tonal answer. But surely the pervasiveuse of the B-E motive through
almost the whole sequenceof sketches representsa far more compelling
clue than whether or not the fugato resembles an orthodox fugue
exposition.
The ability to transcribesketches and the ability to analyzefinished
pieces are related, for to do either one well requires a knowledge of
of
composition. Every good transcriber Beethoven'ssketchesis, at least
potentially, a good musical analyst. This surely includes Nottebohm,
whose approachwas far from analyticalin today's sense of the word,
but whose astonishingachievementsmust have resulted as much from
his superbly developed musical skills as from his ability to read Beethoven's handwriting.The sketches for op. 14/1 reveal particularly
clearly one of the things that a transcriberor analyst should try to discover in the course of his work: the presence of one or more compositional ideas-features like the rising fourth or chromatic motive of
character.If he is fortunate
op. 14/1-that help give a piece its individual
enough to find such features, he may be able to deal successfullywith
problemsthat cannot be solved on the basis of the sometimes very inconclusivegraphicevidencein the sources.
I do not think that many people would dispute the suggestionthat
trainingin analysiswill help develop the ability to transcribeand study
Beethoven's sketches;if it doesn't do so, something is probablywrong
with the training or with the analytic approach. Most analysts and
scholars seem to feel that the reverse is also true, that studying the
sketches is helpful to the analyst.Howevera very importantBeethoven
scholar takes issue with this idea. In the Introductionto his study of
the "Fischhof" miscellany, Douglas Johnson elaboratesa very negative
view of the value of sketch study for the analysisof Beethoven'scompositions.20 He maintains that anything in a sketch that bears on a
piece must also occur in the piece itself and must thereforebe available
to the analystwithout the help of the sketch. Apartfrom their indisputable value as biographicaldata, the sketches merely confirm what the
analyst could discoverwithout them. But surely this reasoningis wide
of the mark. Finding confirmationfor one's ideas is a largeand highly
important part of the analytic process and ought not to be dismissed
as of negligiblevalue. Besides,studyingsketchesmay very well generate
ideas about the piece. Of courseone can analyzemusic without recourse
to sketches. But where sketches are available,it would be foolish to
ignorethem.
voiceJohnson suggests, only to reject, the notion that large-scale
leading connections might emerge more clearly in a sketch than in the
His
completed piece with its complex fabric of tonal relationships.21
18

doubts on this score are partly justified; the sketches do not constitute
structurallevels leading from backgroundto foreground.(It will be remembered that Schenkerexplicitly denied that his analysesreproduce
the chronology of composition; he maintainedthat a composer might
begin at any level or combination of levels.) And as I suggestedearlier,
sketches-even relativelycomplete drafts-do not alwayspresenta foreground that is developed and articulatedwell enough to permita clear
sense of backgroundto emerge.
Nevertheless sketches do sometimes clarify the larger tonal connections of a piece; in closing this articleI should like to cite an instance
from op. 14/1. In the B-majorpart of the exposition, the upper voice
certainly descends from F# (m. 22) to B (m. 57), but the path from F#
to B is by no means obvious, largely because the strongest cadence
(mm. 54-57) lacks a stepwise descendingconnectionto B in the soprano.
(The situation is the same in the correspondingpart of the recapitulation.) In the sketches,the materialof bars 50-57 first appearsin London
2, where the cadential soprano clearly representsD#f-C#t-B(Example
11). The simple soprano line of the sketch illuminatesthe final version
in which it undergoes an elaborate transformation.The basis of this
transformationis the suppressionof C# (2 of B), which allows B (i) to
be approachedthrougha motion from the innervoice: F#-Fx-G# -A B. This motion is none other than the climacticand beautiful combination of the rising fourth and chromatic motive discussed above (see
p. 12). Recognizing the underlying structure of this cadence would
lead to an interpretationof the B-majorgroup like the one shown in
Example 17.

19

'B:5

4

2

t

becomes

J

22

3
38

r4 {6

54

56

Example 17. Op. 14/1 exposition,
graph of second group
Example 17. Op. 14/1 exposition, graphof second group

20

NOTES
1. DouglasPorterJohnson,Beethoven'sEarly Sketchesin the 'FischhofMiscellany', 2 vols. (Ann Arbor:UMIResearch
Press,1980), 1:348.
2. Gustav Nottebohm, Zweite Beethoveniana (Leipzig: C. F. Peters Verlag,
New
1887; reproduced
photographically, York:JohnsonReprintCorporation,
was
1970), pp. 45-59. The materialon op. 14/1 in ZweiteBeethoveniana reprinted posthumouslyfrom two articles that had appearedin Musikalisches
Wochenblatt 9 and 16 April 1875.
on
3. Joseph Kerman,ed., Beethoven. AutographMiscellanyfrom Circa 1786 to
1799, 2 vols. (London: British Museum,1970), 2:25-33. Facsimilesof the
op. 14/1 sketchesarein 1: ff. 65v, 121r, 121v, 122r, and 122v.
4. Johnson,Beethoven's
EarlySketches,2:57-61.
5. JenniferGild, Beethoven'sPiano Sonata Op. 14, No. 1: an Analysis of the
Sketches(M.A. thesis,Bar-Ilan
University,1977).
6. Johnson,Beethoven's
EarlySketches, 1:350.
7. Johnson,Beethoven'sEarlySketches,2:57; Gild,Beethoven,Appendix1, unpaged.Also see Nottebohm,ZweiteBeethoveniana, 45-46.
pp.
8. Nottebohm,ZweiteBeethoveniana, 47-51; Kerman,
Beethoven,2:25-27.
pp.
9. Kerman,
Beethoven, 1:f.122v, 2:28; the passageis not in Nottebohm.
10. Nottebohm,ZweiteBeethoveniana, 51; Kerman,
p.
Beethoven,2:28.
11. Nottebohm Zweite Beethoveniana,pp. 53-54; Kerman,Beethoven, 2:2829.
12. The sketch is on one of the Stockholmfragments:transcription Johnson,
in
2:59.
13. Nottebohm,Zweite Beethoveniana,p. 51. Also see Donald FrancisTovey,A
to
Sonatas(London:The AssociatedBoard
Companion Beethoven'sPianoforte
of the Royal Schools of Music, 1931), p. 71. A more perceptivediscussionof
this passageoccurs in Paul Mies,Beethoven'sSketches, trans. Doris L. Mackinson (Oxford: Oxford UniversityPress, 1929, reproducedphotographically
New York:DoverPublications,1974), p. 115.
14. Transcribed Johnson,Beethoven'sEarlySketches,2:58.
in
15. Johnsonmakesthe samepoint in Beethoven'sEarlySketches, 1:349.
16. Nottebohm,ZweiteBeethoveniana, 50-51 (exposition)and pp. 54-55 (repp.
capitulation);
Kerman,
Beethoven,vol. 2, 2:27 (exposition)and 2:29 (recapitulation).
17. RudolphReti, ThematicPatternsin Sonatasof Beethoven,ed. DeryckCooke
(New York:Macmillan,
1967), pp. 192-195.
18. A. E. Housman,"The Applicationof Thoughtto TextualCriticism," John
in
Carter,ed., A. E. Housman.SelectedProse (Cambridge:
University
Cambridge
Press,1961), p. 145.
19. Johnson,Beethoven's
EarlySketches,2:57; Kerman,
Beethoven,2:278.
20. Johnson,Beethoven'sEarly Sketches, 1:12-18. The greaterpartof this Introduction appearsin "Beethoven Scholars and Beethoven's Sketches,"19th
Century Music 2 (1978): 3-17. Also see Johnson's responseto comments
elicitedby this articlein 19th Century
Music,2 (1979):276-279.
21. Johnson,Beethoven's
EarlySketches, 1:14.

21

