Composer attribution by quantifying compositional strategies
Peter van Kranenburg
Department of Information and Computing Sciences
Utrecht University
petervk@cs.uu.nl

Abstract
Taking a theory of musical style, developed by Leonard B.
Meyer, as a starting point, an experiment is described in
which statistical pattern recognition algorithms are used to
characterize a particular musical style with respect to other
styles. The resulting description can be used in authorship
discussions. In the current study, a number of disputed organ works from the Bach catalog is used to illustrate the
possibilities of this approach.
Keywords: Musical Style, Pattern Recognition, Classical
Music, Composer Attribution, Johann Sebastian Bach.

1. Introduction
In order to describe a musical style, or differences between
styles, or the historical development of certain styles, a theory of style is necessary. This applies to “traditional” descriptions of musical style as well as studies in which tools
and algorithms from information technology are used.
In [5], Leonard Meyer develops a theory of musical style
that can be used as starting point for studies in which statistical pattern recognition algorithms are used to study and
compare musical styles. Meyer deﬁnes (musical) style as
follows: Style is a replication of patterning, whether in human behavior or in the artifacts produced by human behavior, that results from a series of choices made within some
set of constraints.
Without repeating patterns, there would be no style at
all. The constraints are important for they shape a musical style by allowing certain patterns and disallowing others. Meyer distinguishes three levels in these constraints:
laws, rules and strategies. Laws are universal constraints,
e.g., one cannot ask a piccolo to play a contra G. The second level, the rules are intracultural constraints. It is in the
rules that music from the Renaissance differs from music
from the Baroque. The third level, the strategies are constraints the composer subjects himself to, within the rules of
a certain cultural established style. Thus it is in the strategies that the music of G.F. Handel differs from the music of
G.Ph. Telemann. Strategies reside on conscious as well as
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies
are not made or distributed for proﬁt or commercial advantage and that
copies bear this notice and the full citation on the ﬁrst page.
c 2006 University of Victoria

on unconscious levels. Certain patterns are ingrained during the training and development of a composer and are not
replicated consciously.
In the second part of his book, Meyer applies his theory
to nineteenth century western classical music. He addresses
some general patterns that recur in many compositions from
that age and connects these patterns to the underlying romantic esthetic and ideology. In doing so, he is forced to
limit himself to proof by example. For a more profound
evaluation of musical styles, it would be necessary to make
extensive use of all available data (everything in all considered scores). For achieving this, statistical pattern recognition algorithms can be of great use. As Meyer himself states:
“Since all classiﬁcation and all generalization about stylistic traits are based on some estimate of relative frequency,
statistics are inescapable.” [5], p. 64.

2. A Pattern Recognition Approach
Meyer’s theory offers a theoretical background for the design of experiments in which algorithms from statistical pattern recognition are used. The features that will represent
(parts of) compositions can be allied with the replicated patterns that are mentioned in Meyer’s deﬁnition. Assuming
that for a certain musicological problem the scores involved
are electronically available, a major task will be the extraction of the feature values from those scores. From the perspective of “traditional” style analysis, large-scale features
are more interesting than small-scale features, e.g., in order
to determine the way in which a certain composition resembles a sonata-form, a global overview of the entire composition is necessary. These, indeed, are the kind of features
Meyer uses. From the perspective of algorithmic extraction, small-scale features are more interesting, because the
algorithms to extract them are less complicated and the results less ambiguous. It is, for example, not clear how to
quantify the extent to which a composition resembles a certain sonata-form, but it is much less difﬁcult to determine
the proportion of parallel thirds with respect to all interval successions in the composition. So we need small-scale
patterns, which can be easily detected and counted, and of
which we have many.
With this in mind, a set of twenty features is designed.
The smallest scale in a score is that of the relation of a single
note to the other notes around it. Most features quantify aspects of local (note-level) relations between voices in poly-

phonic compositions. Because we will use this representation for studying authorship of organ fugues, the restriction to polyphonic compositions is not a problem. There are
also some other features in the set, that describe more global
characteristics. The features are described in [1]. Here a list
of them is provided:
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.

StabTimeslice
DissPart
BeginBarDiss
SonorityEntropy
HarmonyEntropy

6. PitchEntropy
7. VoiceDensity
8. PartSeconds
9. PartThirds
10. PartFourths

11.
12.
13.
14.
15.

PartAugFourths
PartDimFifths
PartFifths
PartSixths
PartSevenths

16.
17.
18.
19.
20.

PartOctaves
ParThirds
ParFourths
ParSixths
StepSuspension

By measuring all these features, (parts of) compositions
are represented as vectors in a 20-dimensional space. To
such a data set various kinds of pattern recognition algorithms can be applied.

3. Organ Fugues ascribed to J.S. Bach
As a pilot experiment, a data set is assembled with 16 fugues
for organ that are listed in the catalog of compositions of
Johann Sebastian Bach [7]. Of six of these fugues the authorship has been disputed. Also ﬁve fugues of his eldest
son, Wilhelm Friedemann Bach, and eight of his most important student, Johann Ludwig Krebs, are incorporated. So
we have a three-class data set. 1 Each composition is segmented using a segmenting method described in [1], so each
composition is represented by a “cloud” of points.
The Fisher-transformation, described in [8], p. 145ff, can
be used to project the data points onto a two-dimensional
space in such a way that the classes are optimally separated. This projection, depicted in the background of ﬁgure 1, shows that the compositions of each composer do
form a cluster.
Figure 1 indicates where the data points of the disputed
fugues are projected. Some interesting observations can be
made. The F minor fugue BWV 534.ii, is projected among
the fugues of J.L. Krebs. This fugue has been ascribed to
W.F. Bach [3]. With the current result, that ascription can
be rejected. An ascription to J.L. Krebs seems more likely.
A suggested composer for BWV 536.ii is J.P. Kellner [4].
If this is true, Kellners style resembles more the style of
J.S. Bach than that of the other two composers. BWV 537.ii
is said to be composed partly by J.S. Bach (bar 1–40) and
partly by J.L. Krebs [6]. The ﬁrst part is projected among
the works of J.S. Bach indeed. The second part however, is
outside of both the Bach-region and the Krebs-region. The
ending of the fugue is in the region between J.S. Bach and
Krebs. This does not fully support the hypothesis, but it
shows that a large part of the fugue is not Bach-like. Also
Bach’s authorship of the fugue in C minor, BWV 546.ii, has
been doubted [2]. The current evaluation shows us that, with
respect to the styles of W.F. Bach and J.L. Krebs, this fugue
has the characteristics of the style of J.S. Bach. The fugue in
1 The data set and the scores in humdrum encoding, are available from:
http://www.musical-style-recognition.org.

Figure 1. Projection of disputed fugues on top of the the compositions of J.S. Bach (+), W.F. Bach (o) and J.L. Krebs (*).

D minor, BWV 565.ii, the second part of the most famous
organ work in existence, is not projected among the other
compositions of Bach. This conﬁrms the doubts expressed
in [9].

4. Conclusion
Because not all candidate composers are represented in the
data set, the current results don’t offer enough evidence to
draw conclusions about the authorship of the involved compositions. It is, however, clear that the proposed method is
very helpful in ﬁnding hypotheses about differences in personal styles and thus for studying authorship problems.

References
[1] E. Backer and P. van Kranenburg, “On musical stylometry –
–
a pattern recognition approach”, in Pattern Recognition Letters, 26 (2005), 299–309.
[2] W. Breig, “Versuch einer Theorie der Bachschen Orgelfuge”,
in Die Musikforschung 48 (1995), 14–52.
[3] P. Dirksen, “Het auteurschap van Praeludium en fuga in f
(BWV 534)”, in Het Orgel 96 (2000), nr. 5, 5–14.
[4] D. Humphreys, “A Bach Polyglot – the A major Prelude &
–
Fugue BWV 536”, in The Organ Yearbook XX (1989), 72–
87.
[5] L.B. Meyer, Style and Music – Theory, History, and Ideol–
ogy, Chicago, 1989.
[6] J. O’Donnell, “Mattheson, Krebs and the Fantasia & Fugue
in C minor BWV 537”, in The Organ Yearbook XX (1989),
88–95.
[7] W. Schmieder, Thematisch-systematisches Verzeichnis der
musikalischen Werke von Johann Sebastian Bach. BachWerke-Verzeichnis – 2. uberarbeitete und erweiterte Aus–
¨
gabe, Wiesbaden, 2 1990.
[8] A. Webb, Statistical Pattern Recognition, Chichester, 2 2002.
[9] P. Williams, “BWV 565: a toccata in D minor for organ by
J. S. Bach?”, Early Music 9 (1981), 330–337.

